<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-2-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The Forest of Arden.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Amiens</b>, and two or three Lords, like foresters.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now, my co-mates and brothers in exile,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath not old custom made this life more sweet</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than that of painted pomp? Are not these woods</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More free from peril than the envious court?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here feel we but the penalty of Adam,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The seasons’ difference, as the icy fang</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And churlish chiding of the winter’s wind,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which, when it bites and blows upon my body,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even till I shrink with cold, I smile and say</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“This is no flattery: these are counsellors</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That feelingly persuade me what I am.”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sweet are the uses of adversity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which, like the toad, ugly and venomous,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wears yet a precious jewel in his head;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And this our life exempt from public haunt</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Finds tongues in trees, books in the running brooks,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sermons in stones and good in every thing.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would not change it.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Amiens</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Happy is your grace,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That can translate the stubbornness of fortune</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Into so quiet and so sweet a style.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Come, shall we go and kill us venison?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And yet it irks me the poor dappled fools,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Being native burghers of this desert city,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Should in their own confines with forked heads</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have their round haunches gored.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Lord</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Indeed, my lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The melancholy Jaques grieves at that,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, in that kind, swears you do more usurp</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than doth your brother that hath banish’d you.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To-day my Lord of Amiens and myself</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did steal behind him as he lay along</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Under an oak whose antique root peeps out</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon the brook that brawls along this wood:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To the which place a poor sequester’d stag,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That from the hunter’s aim had ta’en a hurt,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did come to languish, and indeed, my lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The wretched animal heaved forth such groans</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That their discharge did stretch his leathern coat</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Almost to bursting, and the big round tears</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Coursed one another down his innocent nose</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In piteous chase; and thus the hairy fool</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Much marked of the melancholy Jaques,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stood on the extremest verge of the swift brook,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Augmenting it with tears.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But what said Jaques?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did he not moralize this spectacle?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Lord</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, yes, into a thousand similes.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>First, for his weeping into the needless stream;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“Poor deer,” quoth he, “thou makest a testament</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As worldlings do, giving thy sum of more</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To that which had too much:” then, being there alone,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Left and abandon’d of his velvet friends,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“ ’Tis right:” quoth he; “thus misery doth part</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The flux of company:” anon a careless herd,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Full of the pasture, jumps along by him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And never stays to greet him; “Ay” quoth Jaques,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“Sweep on, you fat and greasy citizens;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis just the fashion: wherefore do you look</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon that poor and broken bankrupt there?”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thus most invectively he pierceth through</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The body of the country, city, court,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yea, and of this our life, swearing that we</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are mere usurpers, tyrants and what’s worse,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To fright the animals and to kill them up</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In their assign’d and native dwelling-place.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
							<td>And did you leave him in this contemplation?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Lord</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>We did, my lord, weeping and commenting</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon the sobbing deer.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Show me the place:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I love to cope him in these sullen fits,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For then he’s full of matter.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Lord</td>
							<td>I’ll bring you to him straight. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-2-2" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<p>A room in the palace.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Frederick</b>, with Lords.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Frederick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Can it be possible that no man saw them?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It cannot be: some villains of my court</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are of consent and sufferance in this.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Lord</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I cannot hear of any that did see her.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The ladies, her attendants of her chamber,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Saw her abed, and in the morning early</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They found the bed untreasured of their mistress.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Lord</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord, the roynish clown, at whom so oft</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your grace was wont to laugh, is also missing.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hisperia, the princess’ gentlewoman,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Confesses that she secretly o’erheard</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your daughter and her cousin much commend</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The parts and graces of the wrestler</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That did but lately foil the sinewy Charles;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And she believes, wherever they are gone,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That youth is surely in their company.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Frederick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Send to his brother; fetch that gallant hither;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If he be absent, bring his brother to me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll make him find him: do this suddenly,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And let not search and inquisition quail</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To bring again these foolish runaways. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-2-3" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Before <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver’s</b> house.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</b>, meeting.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
							<td>Who’s there?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What, my young master? O, my gentle master!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O my sweet master! O you memory</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of old Sir Rowland! why, what make you here?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why are you virtuous? why do people love you?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And wherefore are you gentle, strong and valiant?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why would you be so fond to overcome</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The bonny priser of the humorous duke?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your praise is come too swiftly home before you.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Know you not, master, to some kind of men</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their graces serve them but as enemies?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No more do yours: your virtues, gentle master,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are sanctified and holy traitors to you.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, what a world is this, when what is comely</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Envenoms him that bears it!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
							<td>Why, what’s the matter?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O unhappy youth!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come not within these doors; within this roof</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The enemy of all your graces lives:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your brother⁠—no, no brother; yet the son⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet not the son, I will not call him son</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of him I was about to call his father⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath heard your praises, and this night he means</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To burn the lodging where you use to lie</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And you within it: if he fail of that,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He will have other means to cut you off.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I overheard him and his practises.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This is no place; this house is but a butchery:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Abhor it, fear it, do not enter it.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
							<td>Why, whither, Adam, wouldst thou have me go?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
							<td>No matter whither, so you come not here.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What, wouldst thou have me go and beg my food?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or with a base and boisterous sword enforce</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A thievish living on the common road?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This I must do, or know not what to do:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet this I will not do, do how I can;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I rather will subject me to the malice</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of a diverted blood and bloody brother.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But do not so. I have five hundred crowns,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The thrifty hire I saved under your father,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which I did store to be my foster-nurse</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When service should in my old limbs lie lame</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And unregarded age in corners thrown:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take that, and He that doth the ravens feed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yea, providently caters for the sparrow,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be comfort to my age! Here is the gold;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all this I give you. Let me be your servant:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though I look old, yet I am strong and lusty;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For in my youth I never did apply</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hot and rebellious liquors in my blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor did not with unbashful forehead woo</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The means of weakness and debility;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therefore my age is as a lusty winter,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Frosty, but kindly: let me go with you;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll do the service of a younger man</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In all your business and necessities.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O good old man, how well in thee appears</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The constant service of the antique world,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When service sweat for duty, not for meed!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou art not for the fashion of these times,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where none will sweat but for promotion,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And having that, do choke their service up</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even with the having: it is not so with thee.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, poor old man, thou prunest a rotten tree,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That cannot so much as a blossom yield</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In lieu of all thy pains and husbandry</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But come thy ways; well go along together,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And ere we have thy youthful wages spent,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We’ll light upon some settled low content.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Master, go on, and I will follow thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To the last gasp, with truth and loyalty.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From seventeen years till now almost fourscore</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here lived I, but now live here no more.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At seventeen years many their fortunes seek;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But at fourscore it is too late a week:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet fortune cannot recompense me better</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than to die well and not my master’s debtor. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-2-4" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The Forest of Arden.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</b> for Ganymede, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</b> for Aliena, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
							<td>O Jupiter, how weary are my spirits!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
							<td>I care not for my spirits, if my legs were not weary.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
							<td>I could find in my heart to disgrace my man’s apparel and to cry like a woman; but I must comfort the weaker vessel, as doublet and hose ought to show itself courageous to petticoat: therefore courage, good Aliena!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
							<td>I pray you, bear with me; I cannot go no further.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
							<td>For my part, I had rather bear with you than bear you; yet I should bear no cross if I did bear you, for I think you have no money in your purse.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
							<td>Well, this is the forest of Arden.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
							<td>Ay, now am I in Arden; the more fool I; when I was at home, I was in a better place: but travellers must be content.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
							<td>Ay, be so, good Touchstone.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Corin</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>Look you, who comes here; a young man and an old in solemn talk.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corin</td>
							<td>That is the way to make her scorn you still.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</td>
							<td>O Corin, that thou knew’st how I do love her!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corin</td>
							<td>I partly guess; for I have loved ere now.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No, Corin, being old, thou canst not guess,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though in thy youth thou wast as true a lover</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As ever sigh’d upon a midnight pillow:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But if thy love were ever like to mine⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As sure I think did never man love so⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How many actions most ridiculous</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hast thou been drawn to by thy fantasy?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corin</td>
							<td>Into a thousand that I have forgotten.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, thou didst then ne’er love so heartily!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If thou remember’st not the slightest folly</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That ever love did make thee run into,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou hast not loved:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or if thou hast not sat as I do now,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wearying thy hearer in thy mistress’ praise,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou hast not loved:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or if thou hast not broke from company</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Abruptly, as my passion now makes me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou hast not loved.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O Phebe, Phebe, Phebe! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Alas, poor shepherd! searching of thy wound,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have by hard adventure found mine own.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And I mine. I remember, when I was in love I broke</span>
									<br/>
									<span>my sword upon a stone and bid him take that for</span>
									<br/>
									<span>coming a-night to Jane Smile; and I remember the</span>
									<br/>
									<span>kissing of her batlet and the cow’s dugs that her</span>
									<br/>
									<span>pretty chopt hands had milked; and I remember the</span>
									<br/>
									<span>wooing of a peascod instead of her, from whom I took</span>
									<br/>
									<span>two cods and, giving her them again, said with</span>
									<br/>
									<span>weeping tears “Wear these for my sake.” We that are</span>
									<br/>
									<span>true lovers run into strange capers; but as all is</span>
									<br/>
									<span>mortal in nature, so is all nature in love mortal in folly.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
							<td>Thou speakest wiser than thou art ware of.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
							<td>Nay, I shall ne’er be ware of mine own wit till I break my shins against it.</td>
						</tr>
						<!--Verse or prose? Split in source-->
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Jove, Jove! this shepherd’s passion</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is much upon my fashion.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
							<td>And mine; but it grows something stale with me.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I pray you, one of you question yond man</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If he for gold will give us any food:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I faint almost to death.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
							<td>Holla, you clown!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
							<td>Peace, fool: he’s not thy kinsman.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corin</td>
							<td>Who calls?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
							<td>Your betters, sir.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corin</td>
							<td>Else are they very wretched.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
							<td>Peace, I say. Good even to you, friend.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corin</td>
							<td>And to you, gentle sir, and to you all.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I prithee, shepherd, if that love or gold</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can in this desert place buy entertainment,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bring us where we may rest ourselves and feed:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here’s a young maid with travel much oppress’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And faints for succor.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corin</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Fair sir, I pity her</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And wish, for her sake more than for mine own,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My fortunes were more able to relieve her;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But I am shepherd to another man</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And do not shear the fleeces that I graze:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My master is of churlish disposition</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And little recks to find the way to heaven</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By doing deeds of hospitality:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Besides, his cote, his flocks and bounds of feed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are now on sale, and at our sheepcote now,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By reason of his absence, there is nothing</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That you will feed on; but what is, come see.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in my voice most welcome shall you be.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
							<td>What is he that shall buy his flock and pasture?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corin</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That young swain that you saw here but erewhile,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That little cares for buying any thing.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I pray thee, if it stand with honesty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Buy thou the cottage, pasture and the flock,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thou shalt have to pay for it of us.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And we will mend thy wages. I like this place.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And willingly could waste my time in it.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corin</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Assuredly the thing is to be sold:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go with me: if you like upon report</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The soil, the profit and this kind of life,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will your very faithful feeder be</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And buy it with your gold right suddenly. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-2-5" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The Forest.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Amiens</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</b>, and others.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Song.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Amiens</td>
							<td>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span>Under the greenwood tree</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Who loves to lie with me,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And turn his merry note</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Unto the sweet bird’s throat,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Come hither, come hither, come hither:</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Here shall he see</span>
										<br/>
										<span>No enemy</span>
										<br/>
										<span>But winter and rough weather.</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
							<td>More, more, I prithee, more.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Amiens</td>
							<td>It will make you melancholy, Monsieur Jaques.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
							<td>I thank it. More, I prithee, more. I can suck melancholy out of a song, as a weasel sucks eggs. More, I prithee, more.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Amiens</td>
							<td>My voice is ragged: I know I cannot please you.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
							<td>I do not desire you to please me; I do desire you to sing. Come, more; another stanzo: call you ’em stanzos?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Amiens</td>
							<td>What you will, Monsieur Jaques.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
							<td>Nay, I care not for their names; they owe me nothing. Will you sing?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Amiens</td>
							<td>More at your request than to please myself.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
							<td>Well then, if ever I thank any man, I’ll thank you; but that they call compliment is like the encounter of two dog-apes, and when a man thanks me heartily, methinks I have given him a penny and he renders me the beggarly thanks. Come, sing; and you that will not, hold your tongues.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Amiens</td>
							<td>Well, I’ll end the song. Sirs, cover the while; the duke will drink under this tree. He hath been all this day to look you.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
							<td>And I have been all this day to avoid him. He is too disputable for my company: I think of as many matters as he, but I give heaven thanks and make no boast of them. Come, warble, come.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Song.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Amiens</td>
							<td>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span>Who doth ambition shun <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">All together here.</i></span>
										<br/>
										<span>And loves to live i’ the sun,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Seeking the food he eats</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And pleased with what he gets,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Come hither, come hither, come hither:</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Here shall he see</span>
										<br/>
										<span>No enemy</span>
										<br/>
										<span>But winter and rough weather.</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
							<td>I’ll give you a verse to this note that I made yesterday in despite of my invention.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Amiens</td>
							<td>And I’ll sing it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
							<td>
								<p>Thus it goes:⁠—</p>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span>If it do come to pass</span>
										<br/>
										<span>That any man turn ass,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Leaving his wealth and ease,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>A stubborn will to please,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Ducdame, ducdame, ducdame:</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Here shall he see</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Gross fools as he,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>An if he will come to me.</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Amiens</td>
							<td>What’s that “ducdame”?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
							<td>’Tis a Greek invocation, to call fools into a circle. I’ll go sleep, if I can; if I cannot, I’ll rail against all the first-born of Egypt.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Amiens</td>
							<td>And I’ll go seek the duke: his banquet is prepared. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt severally.</i></td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-2-6" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The forest.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
							<td>Dear master, I can go no further. O, I die for food! Here lie I down, and measure out my grave. Farewell, kind master.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
							<td>Why, how now, Adam! no greater heart in thee? Live a little; comfort a little; cheer thyself a little. If this uncouth forest yield any thing savage, I will either be food for it or bring it for food to thee. Thy conceit is nearer death than thy powers. For my sake be comfortable; hold death awhile at the arm’s end: I will here be with thee presently; and if I bring thee not something to eat, I will give thee leave to die: but if thou diest before I come, thou art a mocker of my labour. Well said! thou lookest cheerly, and I’ll be with thee quickly. Yet thou liest in the bleak air: come, I will bear thee to some shelter; and thou shalt not die for lack of a dinner, if there live any thing in this desert. Cheerly, good Adam! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-2-7" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The forest.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">A table set out. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Amiens</b>, and Lords like outlaws.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I think he be transform’d into a beast;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For I can no where find him like a man.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Lord</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord, he is but even now gone hence:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here was he merry, hearing of a song.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If he, compact of jars, grow musical,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We shall have shortly discord in the spheres.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go, seek him: tell him I would speak with him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Lord</td>
							<td>He saves my labour by his own approach.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, how now, monsieur! what a life is this,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That your poor friends must woo your company?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What, you look merrily!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A fool, a fool! I met a fool i’ the forest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A motley fool; a miserable world!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As I do live by food, I met a fool</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who laid him down and bask’d him in the sun,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And rail’d on Lady Fortune in good terms,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In good set terms and yet a motley fool.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“Good morrow, fool,” quoth I. “No, sir,” quoth he,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“Call me not fool till heaven hath sent me fortune:”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then he drew a dial from his poke,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, looking on it with lack-lustre eye,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Says very wisely, “It is ten o’clock:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thus we may see,” quoth he, “how the world wags:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis but an hour ago since it was nine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And after one hour more ’twill be eleven;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And so, from hour to hour, we ripe and ripe,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then, from hour to hour, we rot and rot;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thereby hangs a tale.” When I did hear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The motley fool thus moral on the time,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My lungs began to crow like chanticleer,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That fools should be so deep-contemplative,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I did laugh sans intermission</span>
									<br/>
									<span>An hour by his dial. O noble fool!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A worthy fool! Motley’s the only wear.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
							<td>What fool is this?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O worthy fool! One that hath been a courtier,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And says, if ladies be but young and fair,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They have the gift to know it: and in his brain,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which is as dry as the remainder biscuit</span>
									<br/>
									<span>After a voyage, he hath strange places cramm’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With observation, the which he vents</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In mangled forms. O that I were a fool!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am ambitious for a motley coat.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
							<td>Thou shalt have one.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It is my only suit;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Provided that you weed your better judgments</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of all opinion that grows rank in them</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I am wise. I must have liberty</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Withal, as large a charter as the wind,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To blow on whom I please; for so fools have;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And they that are most galled with my folly,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They most must laugh. And why, sir, must they so?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The “why” is plain as way to parish church:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He that a fool doth very wisely hit</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Doth very foolishly, although he smart,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not to seem senseless of the bob: if not,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The wise man’s folly is anatomized</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even by the squandering glances of the fool.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Invest me in my motley; give me leave</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To speak my mind, and I will through and through</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cleanse the foul body of the infected world,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If they will patiently receive my medicine.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
							<td>Fie on thee! I can tell what thou wouldst do.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
							<td>What, for a counter, would I do but good?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Most mischievous foul sin, in chiding sin:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For thou thyself hast been a libertine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As sensual as the brutish sting itself;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all the embossed sores and headed evils,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That thou with licence of free foot hast caught,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wouldst thou disgorge into the general world.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, who cries out on pride,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That can therein tax any private party?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Doth it not flow as hugely as the sea,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till that the weary very means do ebb?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What woman in the city do I name,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When that I say the city-woman bears</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The cost of princes on unworthy shoulders?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who can come in and say that I mean her,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When such a one as she such is her neighbour?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or what is he of basest function</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That says his bravery is not of my cost,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thinking that I mean him, but therein suits</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His folly to the mettle of my speech?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There then; how then? what then? Let me see wherein</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My tongue hath wrong’d him: if it do him right,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then he hath wrong’d himself; if he be free,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why then my taxing like a wild-goose flies,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unclaim’d of any man. But who comes here?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</b>, with his sword drawn.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
							<td>Forbear, and eat no more.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
							<td>Why, I have eat none yet.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
							<td>Nor shalt not, till necessity be served.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
							<td>Of what kind should this cock come of?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Art thou thus bolden’d, man, by thy distress,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or else a rude despiser of good manners,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That in civility thou seem’st so empty?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You touch’d my vein at first: the thorny point</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of bare distress hath ta’en from me the show</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of smooth civility: yet am I inland bred</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And know some nurture. But forbear, I say:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He dies that touches any of this fruit</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till I and my affairs are answered.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
							<td>An you will not be answered with reason, I must die.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What would you have? Your gentleness shall force</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More than your force move us to gentleness.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
							<td>I almost die for food; and let me have it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
							<td>Sit down and feed, and welcome to our table.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Speak you so gently? Pardon me, I pray you:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I thought that all things had been savage here;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And therefore put I on the countenance</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of stern commandment. But whate’er you are</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That in this desert inaccessible,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Under the shade of melancholy boughs,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lose and neglect the creeping hours of time</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If ever you have look’d on better days,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If ever been where bells have knoll’d to church,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If ever sat at any good man’s feast,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If ever from your eyelids wiped a tear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And know what ’tis to pity and be pitied,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let gentleness my strong enforcement be:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In the which hope I blush, and hide my sword.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>True is it that we have seen better days,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And have with holy bell been knoll’d to church</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And sat at good men’s feasts and wiped our eyes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of drops that sacred pity hath engender’d:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And therefore sit you down in gentleness</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And take upon command what help we have</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That to your wanting may be minister’d.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then but forbear your food a little while,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whiles, like a doe, I go to find my fawn</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And give it food. There is an old poor man,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who after me hath many a weary step</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Limp’d in pure love: till he be first sufficed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Oppress’d with two weak evils, age and hunger,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will not touch a bit.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Go find him out,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And we will nothing waste till you return.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
							<td>I thank ye; and be blest for your good comfort! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou seest we are not all alone unhappy:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This wide and universal theatre</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Presents more woeful pageants than the scene</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wherein we play in.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>All the world’s a stage,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all the men and women merely players:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They have their exits and their entrances;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And one man in his time plays many parts,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His acts being seven ages. At first the infant,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mewling and puking in the nurse’s arms.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then the whining school-boy, with his satchel</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And shining morning face, creeping like snail</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unwillingly to school. And then the lover,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Made to his mistress’ eyebrow. Then a soldier,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Full of strange oaths and bearded like the pard,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Jealous in honour, sudden and quick in quarrel,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Seeking the bubble reputation</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even in the cannon’s mouth. And then the justice,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In fair round belly with good capon lined,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With eyes severe and beard of formal cut,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Full of wise saws and modern instances;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And so he plays his part. The sixth age shifts</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Into the lean and slipper’d pantaloon,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With spectacles on nose and pouch on side,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His youthful hose, well saved, a world too wide</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For his shrunk shank; and his big manly voice,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Turning again toward childish treble, pipes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And whistles in his sound. Last scene of all,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That ends this strange eventful history,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is second childishness and mere oblivion,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</b>, with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Welcome. Set down your venerable burthen,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And let him feed.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
							<td>I thank you most for him.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>So had you need:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I scarce can speak to thank you for myself.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Welcome; fall to: I will not trouble you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As yet, to question you about your fortunes.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Give us some music; and, good cousin, sing.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Song.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Amiens</td>
							<td>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span>Blow, blow, thou winter wind.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Thou art not so unkind</span>
										<br/>
										<span>As man’s ingratitude;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Thy tooth is not so keen,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Because thou art not seen,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Although thy breath be rude.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Heigh-ho! sing, heigh-ho! unto the green holly:</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly:</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Then, heigh-ho, the holly!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>This life is most jolly.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Freeze, freeze, thou bitter sky,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>That dost not bite so nigh</span>
										<br/>
										<span>As benefits forgot:</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Though thou the waters warp,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Thy sting is not so sharp</span>
										<br/>
										<span>As friend remember’d not.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Heigh-ho! sing, <abbr>etc.</abbr></span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If that you were the good Sir Rowland’s son,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As you have whisper’d faithfully you were,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And as mine eye doth his effigies witness</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Most truly limn’d and living in your face,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be truly welcome hither: I am the duke</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That loved your father: the residue of your fortune,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go to my cave and tell me. Good old man,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou art right welcome as thy master is.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Support him by the arm. Give me your hand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And let me all your fortunes understand. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
