<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-5" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-5-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The forest.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Audrey</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
							<td>We shall find a time, Audrey; patience, gentle Audrey.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audrey</td>
							<td>Faith, the priest was good enough, for all the old gentleman’s saying.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
							<td>A most wicked Sir Oliver, Audrey, a most vile Martext. But, Audrey, there is a youth here in the forest lays claim to you.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audrey</td>
							<td>Ay, I know who ’tis; he hath no interest in me in the world: here comes the man you mean.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
							<td>It is meat and drink to me to see a clown: by my troth, we that have good wits have much to answer for; we shall be flouting; we cannot hold.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">William</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">William</td>
							<td>Good even, Audrey.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audrey</td>
							<td>God ye good even, William.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">William</td>
							<td>And good even to you, sir.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
							<td>Good even, gentle friend. Cover thy head, cover thy head; nay, prithee, be covered. How old are you, friend?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">William</td>
							<td>Five and twenty, sir.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
							<td>A ripe age. Is thy name William?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">William</td>
							<td>William, sir.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
							<td>A fair name. Wast born i’ the forest here?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">William</td>
							<td>Ay, sir, I thank God.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
							<td>“Thank God;” a good answer. Art rich?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">William</td>
							<td>Faith, sir, so so.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
							<td>“So so” is good, very good, very excellent good; and yet it is not; it is but so so. Art thou wise?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">William</td>
							<td>Ay, sir, I have a pretty wit.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
							<td>Why, thou sayest well. I do now remember a saying, “The fool doth think he is wise, but the wise man knows himself to be a fool.” The heathen philosopher, when he had a desire to eat a grape, would open his lips when he put it into his mouth; meaning thereby that grapes were made to eat and lips to open. You do love this maid?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">William</td>
							<td>I do, sir.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
							<td>Give me your hand. Art thou learned?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">William</td>
							<td>No, sir.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
							<td>Then learn this of me: to have, is to have; for it is a figure in rhetoric that drink, being poured out of a cup into a glass, by filling the one doth empty the other; for all your writers do consent that ipse is he: now, you are not ipse, for I am he.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">William</td>
							<td>Which he, sir?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
							<td>He, sir, that must marry this woman. Therefore, you clown, abandon⁠—which is in the vulgar leave⁠—the society⁠—which in the boorish is company⁠—of this female⁠—which in the common is woman; which together is, abandon the society of this female, or, clown, thou perishest; or, to thy better understanding, diest; or, to wit I kill thee, make thee away, translate thy life into death, thy liberty into bondage: I will deal in poison with thee, or in bastinado, or in steel; I will bandy with thee in faction; I will o’errun thee with policy; I will kill thee a hundred and fifty ways: therefore tremble and depart.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audrey</td>
							<td>Do, good William.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">William</td>
							<td>God rest you merry, sir.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i>Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Corin</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corin</td>
							<td>Our master and mistress seeks you; come, away, away!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
							<td>Trip, Audrey! trip, Audrey! I attend, I attend.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-5-2" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The forest.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
							<td>Is’t possible that on so little acquaintance you should like her? that but seeing you should love her? and loving woo? and, wooing, she should grant? and will you persever to enjoy her?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
							<td>Neither call the giddiness of it in question, the poverty of her, the small acquaintance, my sudden wooing, nor her sudden consenting; but say with me, I love Aliena; say with her that she loves me; consent with both that we may enjoy each other: it shall be to your good; for my father’s house and all the revenue that was old Sir Rowland’s will I estate upon you, and here live and die a shepherd.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
							<td>You have my consent. Let your wedding be to-morrow: thither will I invite the duke and all’s contented followers. Go you and prepare Aliena; for look you, here comes my Rosalind.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
							<td>God save you, brother.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
							<td>And you, fair sister.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
							<td>O, my dear Orlando, how it grieves me to see thee wear thy heart in a scarf!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
							<td>It is my arm.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
							<td>I thought thy heart had been wounded with the claws of a lion.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
							<td>Wounded it is, but with the eyes of a lady.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
							<td>Did your brother tell you how I counterfeited to swoon when he showed me your handkerchief?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
							<td>Ay, and greater wonders than that.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
							<td>O, I know where you are: nay, ’tis true: there was never any thing so sudden but the fight of two rams and Caesar’s thrasonical brag of “I came, saw, and overcame:” for your brother and my sister no sooner met but they looked, no sooner looked but they loved, no sooner loved but they sighed, no sooner sighed but they asked one another the reason, no sooner knew the reason but they sought the remedy; and in these degrees have they made a pair of stairs to marriage which they will climb incontinent, or else be incontinent before marriage: they are in the very wrath of love and they will together; clubs cannot part them.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
							<td>They shall be married to-morrow, and I will bid the duke to the nuptial. But, O, how bitter a thing it is to look into happiness through another man’s eyes! By so much the more shall I to-morrow be at the height of heart-heaviness, by how much I shall think my brother happy in having what he wishes for.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
							<td>Why then, to-morrow I cannot serve your turn for Rosalind?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
							<td>I can live no longer by thinking.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
							<td>I will weary you then no longer with idle talking. Know of me then, for now I speak to some purpose, that I know you are a gentleman of good conceit: I speak not this that you should bear a good opinion of my knowledge, insomuch I say I know you are; neither do I labour for a greater esteem than may in some little measure draw a belief from you, to do yourself good and not to grace me. Believe then, if you please, that I can do strange things: I have, since I was three year old, conversed with a magician, most profound in his art and yet not damnable. If you do love Rosalind so near the heart as your gesture cries it out, when your brother marries Aliena, shall you marry her: I know into what straits of fortune she is driven; and it is not impossible to me, if it appear not inconvenient to you, to set her before your eyes tomorrow human as she is and without any danger.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
							<td>Speakest thou in sober meanings?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
							<td>By my life, I do; which I tender dearly, though I say I am a magician. Therefore, put you in your best array: bid your friends; for if you will be married to-morrow, you shall, and to Rosalind, if you will.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Phebe</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>Look, here comes a lover of mine and a lover of hers.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phebe</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Youth, you have done me much ungentleness,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To show the letter that I writ to you.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I care not if I have: it is my study</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To seem despiteful and ungentle to you:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You are there followed by a faithful shepherd;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Look upon him, love him; he worships you.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phebe</td>
							<td>Good shepherd, tell this youth what ’tis to love.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It is to be all made of sighs and tears;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And so am I for Phebe.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phebe</td>
							<td>And I for Ganymede.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
							<td>And I for Rosalind.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
							<td>And I for no woman.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It is to be all made of faith and service;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And so am I for Phebe.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phebe</td>
							<td>And I for Ganymede.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
							<td>And I for Rosalind.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
							<td>And I for no woman.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It is to be all made of fantasy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All made of passion and all made of wishes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All adoration, duty, and observance,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All humbleness, all patience and impatience,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All purity, all trial, all observance;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And so am I for Phebe.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phebe</td>
							<td>And so am I for Ganymede.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
							<td>And so am I for Rosalind.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
							<td>And so am I for no woman.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phebe</td>
							<td>If this be so, why blame you me to love you?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</td>
							<td>If this be so, why blame you me to love you?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
							<td>If this be so, why blame you me to love you?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
							<td>Who do you speak to, “Why blame you me to love you?”</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
							<td>To her that is not here, nor doth not hear.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
							<td>Pray you, no more of this; ’tis like the howling of Irish wolves against the moon. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</b>.</i> I will help you, if I can: <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Phebe</b>.</i> I would love you, if I could. To-morrow meet me all together. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Phebe</b>.</i> I will marry you, if ever I marry woman, and I’ll be married to-morrow: <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</b>.</i> I will satisfy you, if ever I satisfied man, and you shall be married to-morrow: <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</b>.</i> I will content you, if what pleases you contents you, and you shall be married to-morrow. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</b>.</i> As you love Rosalind, meet: <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</b>.</i> as you love Phebe, meet: and as I love no woman, I’ll meet. So fare you well: I have left you commands.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</td>
							<td>I’ll not fail, if I live.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phebe</td>
							<td>Nor I.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
							<td>Nor I.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-5-3" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The forest.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Audrey</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
							<td>To-morrow is the joyful day, Audrey; to-morrow will we be married.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audrey</td>
							<td>I do desire it with all my heart; and I hope it is no dishonest desire to desire to be a woman of the world. Here comes two of the banished duke’s pages.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter two <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pages</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Page</td>
							<td>Well met, honest gentleman.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
							<td>By my troth, well met. Come, sit, sit, and a song.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Page</td>
							<td>We are for you: sit i’ the middle.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Page</td>
							<td>Shall we clap into’t roundly, without hawking or spitting or saying we are hoarse, which are the only prologues to a bad voice?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Page</td>
							<td>
								<p>I’faith, i’faith; and both in a tune, like two gipsies on a horse.</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Song.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<!--Questionable indentation and stanza breaks. This is pretty accurate to the scans on pg 381, but I'd prefer it was all i1 and i2 as other songs are. Note the [Editorial] commit to expand the last line from the scans.-->
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse z3998:song">
								<p>
									<span>It was a lover and his lass,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That o’er the green corn-field did pass</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">In the spring time, the only pretty ring time,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sweet lovers love the spring.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Between the acres of the rye,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These pretty country folks would lie,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">In the spring time, the only pretty ring time,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sweet lovers love the spring.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>This carol they began that hour,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How that a life was but a flower</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">In the spring time, the only pretty ring time,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sweet lovers love the spring.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>And therefore take the present time,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For love is crowned with the prime</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">In the spring time, the only pretty ring time,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sweet lovers love the spring.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
							<td>Truly, young gentlemen, though there was no great matter in the ditty, yet the note was very untuneable.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Page</td>
							<td>You are deceived, sir: we kept time, we lost not our time.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
							<td>By my troth, yes; I count it but time lost to hear such a foolish song. God be wi’ you; and God mend your voices! Come, Audrey.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-5-4" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The forest.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Amiens</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Dost thou believe, Orlando, that the boy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can do all this that he hath promised?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I sometimes do believe, and sometimes do not;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As those that fear they hope, and know they fear.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Phebe</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Patience once more, whiles our compact is urged:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You say, if I bring in your Rosalind,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You will bestow her on Orlando here?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
							<td>That would I, had I kingdoms to give with her.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
							<td>And you say, you will have her, when I bring her?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
							<td>That would I, were I of all kingdoms king.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
							<td>You say, you’ll marry me, if I be willing?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phebe</td>
							<td>That will I, should I die the hour after.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But if you do refuse to marry me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You’ll give yourself to this most faithful shepherd?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phebe</td>
							<td>So is the bargain.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
							<td>You say, that you’ll have Phebe, if she will?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</td>
							<td>Though to have her and death were both one thing.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I have promised to make all this matter even.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Keep you your word, O duke, to give your daughter;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You yours, Orlando, to receive his daughter:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Keep your word, Phebe, that you’ll marry me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or else refusing me, to wed this shepherd:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Keep your word, Silvius, that you’ll marry her.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If she refuse me: and from hence I go,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To make these doubts all even.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I do remember in this shepherd boy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some lively touches of my daughter’s favour.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord, the first time that I ever saw him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Methought he was a brother to your daughter:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, my good lord, this boy is forest-born,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And hath been tutor’d in the rudiments</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of many desperate studies by his uncle,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whom he reports to be a great magician,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Obscured in the circle of this forest.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Audrey</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
							<td>There is, sure, another flood toward, and these couples are coming to the ark. Here comes a pair of very strange beasts, which in all tongues are called fools.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
							<td>Salutation and greeting to you all!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
							<td>Good my lord, bid him welcome: this is the motley-minded gentleman that I have so often met in the forest: he hath been a courtier, he swears.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
							<td>If any man doubt that, let him put me to my purgation. I have trod a measure; I have flattered a lady; I have been politic with my friend, smooth with mine enemy; I have undone three tailors; I have had four quarrels, and like to have fought one.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
							<td>And how was that ta’en up?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
							<td>Faith, we met, and found the quarrel was upon the seventh cause.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
							<td>How seventh cause? Good my lord, like this fellow.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
							<td>I like him very well.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
							<td>God “ild you, sir; I desire you of the like. I press in here, sir, amongst the rest of the country copulatives, to swear and to forswear: according as marriage binds and blood breaks: a poor virgin, sir, an ill-favoured thing, sir, but mine own; a poor humour of mine, sir, to take that that no man else will: rich honesty dwells like a miser, sir, in a poor house; as your pearl in your foul oyster.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
							<td>By my faith, he is very swift and sententious.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
							<td>According to the fool’s bolt, sir, and such dulcet diseases.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
							<td>But, for the seventh cause; how did you find the quarrel on the seventh cause?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
							<td>Upon a lie seven times removed:⁠—bear your body more seeming, Audrey:⁠—as thus, sir. I did dislike the cut of a certain courtier’s beard: he sent me word, if I said his beard was not cut well, he was in the mind it was: this is called the Retort Courteous. If I sent him word again “it was not well cut,” he would send me word, he cut it to please himself: this is called the Quip Modest. If again “it was not well cut,” he disabled my judgment: this is called the Reply Churlish. If again “it was not well cut,” he would answer, I spake not true: this is called the Reproof Valiant. If again “it was not well cut,” he would say I lied: this is called the Counter-cheque Quarrelsome: and so to the Lie Circumstantial and the Lie Direct.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
							<td>And how oft did you say his beard was not well cut?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
							<td>I durst go no further than the Lie Circumstantial, nor he durst not give me the Lie Direct; and so we measured swords and parted.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
							<td>Can you nominate in order now the degrees of the lie?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
							<td>O sir, we quarrel in print, by the book; as you have books for good manners: I will name you the degrees. The first, the Retort Courteous; the second, the Quip Modest; the third, the Reply Churlish; the fourth, the Reproof Valiant; the fifth, the Countercheque Quarrelsome; the sixth, the Lie with Circumstance; the seventh, the Lie Direct. All these you may avoid but the Lie Direct; and you may avoid that too, with an If. I knew when seven justices could not take up a quarrel, but when the parties were met themselves, one of them thought but of an If, as, “If you said so, then I said so;” and they shook hands and swore brothers. Your If is the only peacemaker; much virtue in If.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
							<td>Is not this a rare fellow, my lord? he’s as good at any thing and yet a fool.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
							<td>He uses his folly like a stalking-horse and under the presentation of that he shoots his wit.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Hymen</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Still Music.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<!--Weird but scan accurate indentation - pg 383-->
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hymen</td>
							<td>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span class="i1">Then is there mirth in heaven,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">When earthly things made even</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Atone together.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Good duke, receive thy daughter</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Hymen from heaven brought her,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Yea, brought her hither,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">That thou mightst join her hand with his</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Whose heart within his bosom is.</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</b>.</i> To you I give myself, for I am yours.</span>
									<br/>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</b>.</i>To you I give myself, for I am yours.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
							<td>If there be truth in sight, you are my daughter.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
							<td>If there be truth in sight, you are my Rosalind.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phebe</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If sight and shape be true,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why then, my love adieu!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I’ll have no father, if you be not he:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll have no husband, if you be not he:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor ne’er wed woman, if you be not she.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<!--Weird but scan-accurate indentation. pg 383. I don't love how it makes it all look like it's a song. I'm also not sure if it should be a song or not.-->
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hymen</td>
							<td>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span class="i1">Peace, ho! I bar confusion:</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">’Tis I must make conclusion</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Of these most strange events:</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Here’s eight that must take hands</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">To join in Hymen’s bands,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">If truth holds true contents.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">You and you no cross shall part:</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">You and you are heart in heart</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">You to his love must accord,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Or have a woman to your lord:</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">You and you are sure together,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">As the winter to foul weather.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Whiles a wedlock-hymn we sing,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Feed yourselves with questioning;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">That reason wonder may diminish,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">How thus we met, and these things finish.</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
								<p>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Song.</i>
								</p>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span class="i1">Wedding is great Juno’s crown:</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">O blessed bond of board and bed!</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">’Tis Hymen peoples every town;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">High wedlock then be honoured:</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Honour, high honour and renown,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">To Hymen, god of every town!</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O my dear niece, welcome thou art to me!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even daughter, welcome, in no less degree.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phebe</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I will not eat my word, now thou art mine;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy faith my fancy to thee doth combine.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques de Boys</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques de Boys</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Let me have audience for a word or two:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am the second son of old Sir Rowland,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That bring these tidings to this fair assembly.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Duke Frederick, hearing how that every day</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Men of great worth resorted to this forest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Address’d a mighty power; which were on foot,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In his own conduct, purposely to take</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His brother here and put him to the sword:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And to the skirts of this wild wood he came;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where meeting with an old religious man,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>After some question with him, was converted</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Both from his enterprise and from the world,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His crown bequeathing to his banish’d brother,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all their lands restored to them again</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That were with him exiled. This to be true,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I do engage my life.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Welcome, young man;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou offer’st fairly to thy brothers’ wedding:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To one his lands withheld, and to the other</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A land itself at large, a potent dukedom.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>First, in this forest, let us do those ends</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That here were well begun and well begot:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And after, every of this happy number</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That have endured shrewd days and nights with us</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall share the good of our returned fortune,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>According to the measure of their states.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Meantime, forget this new-fall’n dignity</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And fall into our rustic revelry.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Play, music! And you, brides and bridegrooms all,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With measure heap’d in joy, to the measures fall.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sir, by your patience. If I heard you rightly,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The duke hath put on a religious life</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thrown into neglect the pompous court?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques De boys</td>
							<td>He hath.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>To him will I: out of these convertites</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There is much matter to be heard and learn’d.</span>
									<br/>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</b>.</i>You to your former honour I bequeath;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your patience and your virtue well deserves it:</span>
									<br/>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</b>.</i>You to a love that your true faith doth merit:</span>
									<br/>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</b>.</i>You to your land and love and great allies:</span>
									<br/>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</b>.</i>You to a long and well-deserved bed:</span>
									<br/>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</b>.</i>And you to wrangling; for thy loving voyage</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is but for two months victuall’d. So, to your pleasures:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am for other than for dancing measures.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
							<td>Stay, Jaques, stay.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>To see no pastime I what you would have</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll stay to know at your abandon’d cave.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Proceed, proceed: we will begin these rites,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As we do trust they’ll end, in true delights. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">A dance.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
