<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>



<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-1-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Orchard of Oliver's house.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						



<p><blockquote>
<i>Enter ORLANDO and ADAM</i>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>As I remember, Adam, it was upon this fashion</A><br>
<A>bequeathed me by will but poor a thousand crowns,</A><br>
<A>and, as thou sayest, charged my brother, on his</A><br>
<A>blessing, to breed me well: and there begins my</A><br>
<A>sadness. My brother Jaques he keeps at school, and</A><br>
<A>report speaks goldenly of his profit: for my part,</A><br>
<A>he keeps me rustically at home, or, to speak more</A><br>
<A>properly, stays me here at home unkept; for call you</A><br>
<A>that keeping for a gentleman of my birth, that</A><br>
<A>differs not from the stalling of an ox? His horses</A><br>
<A>are bred better; for, besides that they are fair</A><br>
<A>with their feeding, they are taught their manage,</A><br>
<A>and to that end riders dearly hired: but I, his</A><br>
<A>brother, gain nothing under him but growth; for the</A><br>
<A>which his animals on his dunghills are as much</A><br>
<A>bound to him as I. Besides this nothing that he so</A><br>
<A>plentifully gives me, the something that nature gave</A><br>
<A>me his countenance seems to take from me: he lets</A><br>
<A>me feed with his hinds, bars me the place of a</A><br>
<A>brother, and, as much as in him lies, mines my</A><br>
<A>gentility with my education. This is it, Adam, that</A><br>
<A>grieves me; and the spirit of my father, which I</A><br>
<A>think is within me, begins to mutiny against this</A><br>
<A>servitude: I will no longer endure it, though yet I</A><br>
<A>know no wise remedy how to avoid it.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Yonder comes my master, your brother.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Go apart, Adam, and thou shalt hear how he will</A><br>
<A>shake me up.</A><br>
<p><i>Enter OLIVER</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Now, sir! what make you here?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Nothing: I am not taught to make any thing.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
<blockquote>
<A>What mar you then, sir?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Marry, sir, I am helping you to mar that which God</A><br>
<A>made, a poor unworthy brother of yours, with idleness.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Marry, sir, be better employed, and be naught awhile.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Shall I keep your hogs and eat husks with them?</A><br>
<A>What prodigal portion have I spent, that I should</A><br>
<A>come to such penury?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Know you where your are, sir?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>O, sir, very well; here in your orchard.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Know you before whom, sir?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Ay, better than him I am before knows me. I know</A><br>
<A>you are my eldest brother; and, in the gentle</A><br>
<A>condition of blood, you should so know me. The</A><br>
<A>courtesy of nations allows you my better, in that</A><br>
<A>you are the first-born; but the same tradition</A><br>
<A>takes not away my blood, were there twenty brothers</A><br>
<A>betwixt us: I have as much of my father in me as</A><br>
<A>you; albeit, I confess, your coming before me is</A><br>
<A>nearer to his reverence.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
<blockquote>
<A>What, boy!</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Come, come, elder brother, you are too young in this.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Wilt thou lay hands on me, villain?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I am no villain; I am the youngest son of Sir</A><br>
<A>Rowland de Boys; he was my father, and he is thrice</A><br>
<A>a villain that says such a father begot villains.</A><br>
<A>Wert thou not my brother, I would not take this hand</A><br>
<A>from thy throat till this other had pulled out thy</A><br>
<A>tongue for saying so: thou hast railed on thyself.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Sweet masters, be patient: for your father's</A><br>
<A>remembrance, be at accord.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Let me go, I say.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I will not, till I please: you shall hear me. My</A><br>
<A>father charged you in his will to give me good</A><br>
<A>education: you have trained me like a peasant,</A><br>
<A>obscuring and hiding from me all gentleman-like</A><br>
<A>qualities. The spirit of my father grows strong in</A><br>
<A>me, and I will no longer endure it: therefore allow</A><br>
<A>me such exercises as may become a gentleman, or</A><br>
<A>give me the poor allottery my father left me by</A><br>
<A>testament; with that I will go buy my fortunes.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
<blockquote>
<A>And what wilt thou do? beg, when that is spent?</A><br>
<A>Well, sir, get you in: I will not long be troubled</A><br>
<A>with you; you shall have some part of your will: I</A><br>
<A>pray you, leave me.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I will no further offend you than becomes me for my good.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Get you with him, you old dog.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Is 'old dog' my reward? Most true, I have lost my</A><br>
<A>teeth in your service. God be with my old master!</A><br>
<A>he would not have spoke such a word.</A><br>
<p><i>Exeunt ORLANDO and ADAM</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Is it even so? begin you to grow upon me? I will</A><br>
<A>physic your rankness, and yet give no thousand</A><br>
<A>crowns neither. Holla, Dennis!</A><br>
<p><i>Enter DENNIS</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dennis</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Calls your worship?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Was not Charles, the duke's wrestler, here to speak with me?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dennis</td>
<blockquote>
<A>So please you, he is here at the door and importunes</A><br>
<A>access to you.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Call him in.</A><br>
<p><i>Exit DENNIS</i></p>
<A>'Twill be a good way; and to-morrow the wrestling is.</A><br>
<p><i>Enter CHARLES</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Good morrow to your worship.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Good Monsieur Charles, what's the new news at the</A><br>
<A>new court?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</td>
<blockquote>
<A>There's no news at the court, sir, but the old news:</A><br>
<A>that is, the old duke is banished by his younger</A><br>
<A>brother the new duke; and three or four loving lords</A><br>
<A>have put themselves into voluntary exile with him,</A><br>
<A>whose lands and revenues enrich the new duke;</A><br>
<A>therefore he gives them good leave to wander.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Can you tell if Rosalind, the duke's daughter, be</A><br>
<A>banished with her father?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</td>
<blockquote>
<A>O, no; for the duke's daughter, her cousin, so loves</A><br>
<A>her, being ever from their cradles bred together,</A><br>
<A>that she would have followed her exile, or have died</A><br>
<A>to stay behind her. She is at the court, and no</A><br>
<A>less beloved of her uncle than his own daughter; and</A><br>
<A>never two ladies loved as they do.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Where will the old duke live?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</td>
<blockquote>
<A>They say he is already in the forest of Arden, and</A><br>
<A>a many merry men with him; and there they live like</A><br>
<A>the old Robin Hood of England: they say many young</A><br>
<A>gentlemen flock to him every day, and fleet the time</A><br>
<A>carelessly, as they did in the golden world.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
<blockquote>
<A>What, you wrestle to-morrow before the new duke?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Marry, do I, sir; and I came to acquaint you with a</A><br>
<A>matter. I am given, sir, secretly to understand</A><br>
<A>that your younger brother Orlando hath a disposition</A><br>
<A>to come in disguised against me to try a fall.</A><br>
<A>To-morrow, sir, I wrestle for my credit; and he that</A><br>
<A>escapes me without some broken limb shall acquit him</A><br>
<A>well. Your brother is but young and tender; and,</A><br>
<A>for your love, I would be loath to foil him, as I</A><br>
<A>must, for my own honour, if he come in: therefore,</A><br>
<A>out of my love to you, I came hither to acquaint you</A><br>
<A>withal, that either you might stay him from his</A><br>
<A>intendment or brook such disgrace well as he shall</A><br>
<A>run into, in that it is a thing of his own search</A><br>
<A>and altogether against my will.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Charles, I thank thee for thy love to me, which</A><br>
<A>thou shalt find I will most kindly requite. I had</A><br>
<A>myself notice of my brother's purpose herein and</A><br>
<A>have by underhand means laboured to dissuade him from</A><br>
<A>it, but he is resolute. I'll tell thee, Charles:</A><br>
<A>it is the stubbornest young fellow of France, full</A><br>
<A>of ambition, an envious emulator of every man's</A><br>
<A>good parts, a secret and villanous contriver against</A><br>
<A>me his natural brother: therefore use thy</A><br>
<A>discretion; I had as lief thou didst break his neck</A><br>
<A>as his finger. And thou wert best look to't; for if</A><br>
<A>thou dost him any slight disgrace or if he do not</A><br>
<A>mightily grace himself on thee, he will practise</A><br>
<A>against thee by poison, entrap thee by some</A><br>
<A>treacherous device and never leave thee till he</A><br>
<A>hath ta'en thy life by some indirect means or other;</A><br>
<A>for, I assure thee, and almost with tears I speak</A><br>
<A>it, there is not one so young and so villanous this</A><br>
<A>day living. I speak but brotherly of him; but</A><br>
<A>should I anatomize him to thee as he is, I must</A><br>
<A>blush and weep and thou must look pale and wonder.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I am heartily glad I came hither to you. If he come</A><br>
<A>to-morrow, I'll give him his payment: if ever he go</A><br>
<A>alone again, I'll never wrestle for prize more: and</A><br>
<A>so God keep your worship!</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Farewell, good Charles.</A><br>
<p><i>Exit CHARLES</i></p>
<A>Now will I stir this gamester: I hope I shall see</A><br>
<A>an end of him; for my soul, yet I know not why,</A><br>
<A>hates nothing more than he. Yet he's gentle, never</A><br>
<A>schooled and yet learned, full of noble device, of</A><br>
<A>all sorts enchantingly beloved, and indeed so much</A><br>
<A>in the heart of the world, and especially of my own</A><br>
<A>people, who best know him, that I am altogether</A><br>
<A>misprised: but it shall not be so long; this</A><br>
<A>wrestler shall clear all: nothing remains but that</A><br>
<A>I kindle the boy thither; which now I'll go about.</A><br>
<p><i>Exit</i></p>
</blockquote>
<h3>SCENE II. Lawn before the Duke's palace.</h3>
<p><blockquote>
<i>Enter CELIA and ROSALIND</i>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I pray thee, Rosalind, sweet my coz, be merry.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Dear Celia, I show more mirth than I am mistress of;</A><br>
<A>and would you yet I were merrier? Unless you could</A><br>
<A>teach me to forget a banished father, you must not</A><br>
<A>learn me how to remember any extraordinary pleasure.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Herein I see thou lovest me not with the full weight</A><br>
<A>that I love thee. If my uncle, thy banished father,</A><br>
<A>had banished thy uncle, the duke my father, so thou</A><br>
<A>hadst been still with me, I could have taught my</A><br>
<A>love to take thy father for mine: so wouldst thou,</A><br>
<A>if the truth of thy love to me were so righteously</A><br>
<A>tempered as mine is to thee.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Well, I will forget the condition of my estate, to</A><br>
<A>rejoice in yours.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>You know my father hath no child but I, nor none is</A><br>
<A>like to have: and, truly, when he dies, thou shalt</A><br>
<A>be his heir, for what he hath taken away from thy</A><br>
<A>father perforce, I will render thee again in</A><br>
<A>affection; by mine honour, I will; and when I break</A><br>
<A>that oath, let me turn monster: therefore, my</A><br>
<A>sweet Rose, my dear Rose, be merry.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>From henceforth I will, coz, and devise sports. Let</A><br>
<A>me see; what think you of falling in love?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Marry, I prithee, do, to make sport withal: but</A><br>
<A>love no man in good earnest; nor no further in sport</A><br>
<A>neither than with safety of a pure blush thou mayst</A><br>
<A>in honour come off again.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>What shall be our sport, then?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Let us sit and mock the good housewife Fortune from</A><br>
<A>her wheel, that her gifts may henceforth be bestowed equally.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I would we could do so, for her benefits are</A><br>
<A>mightily misplaced, and the bountiful blind woman</A><br>
<A>doth most mistake in her gifts to women.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>'Tis true; for those that she makes fair she scarce</A><br>
<A>makes honest, and those that she makes honest she</A><br>
<A>makes very ill-favouredly.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Nay, now thou goest from Fortune's office to</A><br>
<A>Nature's: Fortune reigns in gifts of the world,</A><br>
<A>not in the lineaments of Nature.</A><br>
<p><i>Enter TOUCHSTONE</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>No? when Nature hath made a fair creature, may she</A><br>
<A>not by Fortune fall into the fire? Though Nature</A><br>
<A>hath given us wit to flout at Fortune, hath not</A><br>
<A>Fortune sent in this fool to cut off the argument?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Indeed, there is Fortune too hard for Nature, when</A><br>
<A>Fortune makes Nature's natural the cutter-off of</A><br>
<A>Nature's wit.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Peradventure this is not Fortune's work neither, but</A><br>
<A>Nature's; who perceiveth our natural wits too dull</A><br>
<A>to reason of such goddesses and hath sent this</A><br>
<A>natural for our whetstone; for always the dulness of</A><br>
<A>the fool is the whetstone of the wits. How now,</A><br>
<A>wit! whither wander you?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Mistress, you must come away to your father.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Were you made the messenger?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>No, by mine honour, but I was bid to come for you.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Where learned you that oath, fool?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Of a certain knight that swore by his honour they</A><br>
<A>were good pancakes and swore by his honour the</A><br>
<A>mustard was naught: now I'll stand to it, the</A><br>
<A>pancakes were naught and the mustard was good, and</A><br>
<A>yet was not the knight forsworn.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>How prove you that, in the great heap of your</A><br>
<A>knowledge?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Ay, marry, now unmuzzle your wisdom.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Stand you both forth now: stroke your chins, and</A><br>
<A>swear by your beards that I am a knave.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>By our beards, if we had them, thou art.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>By my knavery, if I had it, then I were; but if you</A><br>
<A>swear by that that is not, you are not forsworn: no</A><br>
<A>more was this knight swearing by his honour, for he</A><br>
<A>never had any; or if he had, he had sworn it away</A><br>
<A>before ever he saw those pancakes or that mustard.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Prithee, who is't that thou meanest?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>One that old Frederick, your father, loves.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>My father's love is enough to honour him: enough!</A><br>
<A>speak no more of him; you'll be whipped for taxation</A><br>
<A>one of these days.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>The more pity, that fools may not speak wisely what</A><br>
<A>wise men do foolishly.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>By my troth, thou sayest true; for since the little</A><br>
<A>wit that fools have was silenced, the little foolery</A><br>
<A>that wise men have makes a great show. Here comes</A><br>
<A>Monsieur Le Beau.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>With his mouth full of news.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Which he will put on us, as pigeons feed their young.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Then shall we be news-crammed.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>All the better; we shall be the more marketable.</A><br>
<p><i>Enter LE BEAU</i></p>
<A>Bon jour, Monsieur Le Beau: what's the news?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Le Beau</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Fair princess, you have lost much good sport.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Sport! of what colour?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Le Beau</td>
<blockquote>
<A>What colour, madam! how shall I answer you?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>As wit and fortune will.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Or as the Destinies decree.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Well said: that was laid on with a trowel.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Nay, if I keep not my rank,--</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Thou losest thy old smell.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Le Beau</td>
<blockquote>
<A>You amaze me, ladies: I would have told you of good</A><br>
<A>wrestling, which you have lost the sight of.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>You tell us the manner of the wrestling.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Le Beau</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I will tell you the beginning; and, if it please</A><br>
<A>your ladyships, you may see the end; for the best is</A><br>
<A>yet to do; and here, where you are, they are coming</A><br>
<A>to perform it.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Well, the beginning, that is dead and buried.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Le Beau</td>
<blockquote>
<A>There comes an old man and his three sons,--</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I could match this beginning with an old tale.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Le Beau</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Three proper young men, of excellent growth and presence.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>With bills on their necks, 'Be it known unto all men</A><br>
<A>by these presents.'</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Le Beau</td>
<blockquote>
<A>The eldest of the three wrestled with Charles, the</A><br>
<A>duke's wrestler; which Charles in a moment threw him</A><br>
<A>and broke three of his ribs, that there is little</A><br>
<A>hope of life in him: so he served the second, and</A><br>
<A>so the third. Yonder they lie; the poor old man,</A><br>
<A>their father, making such pitiful dole over them</A><br>
<A>that all the beholders take his part with weeping.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Alas!</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>But what is the sport, monsieur, that the ladies</A><br>
<A>have lost?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Le Beau</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Why, this that I speak of.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Thus men may grow wiser every day: it is the first</A><br>
<A>time that ever I heard breaking of ribs was sport</A><br>
<A>for ladies.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Or I, I promise thee.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>But is there any else longs to see this broken music</A><br>
<A>in his sides? is there yet another dotes upon</A><br>
<A>rib-breaking? Shall we see this wrestling, cousin?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Le Beau</td>
<blockquote>
<A>You must, if you stay here; for here is the place</A><br>
<A>appointed for the wrestling, and they are ready to</A><br>
<A>perform it.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Yonder, sure, they are coming: let us now stay and see it.</A><br>
<p><i>Flourish. Enter DUKE FREDERICK, Lords, ORLANDO, CHARLES, and Attendants</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Frederick</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Come on: since the youth will not be entreated, his</A><br>
<A>own peril on his forwardness.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Is yonder the man?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Le Beau</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Even he, madam.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Alas, he is too young! yet he looks successfully.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Frederick</td>
<blockquote>
<A>How now, daughter and cousin! are you crept hither</A><br>
<A>to see the wrestling?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Ay, my liege, so please you give us leave.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Frederick</td>
<blockquote>
<A>You will take little delight in it, I can tell you;</A><br>
<A>there is such odds in the man. In pity of the</A><br>
<A>challenger's youth I would fain dissuade him, but he</A><br>
<A>will not be entreated. Speak to him, ladies; see if</A><br>
<A>you can move him.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Call him hither, good Monsieur Le Beau.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Frederick</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Do so: I'll not be by.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Le Beau</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Monsieur the challenger, the princesses call for you.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I attend them with all respect and duty.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Young man, have you challenged Charles the wrestler?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>No, fair princess; he is the general challenger: I</A><br>
<A>come but in, as others do, to try with him the</A><br>
<A>strength of my youth.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Young gentleman, your spirits are too bold for your</A><br>
<A>years. You have seen cruel proof of this man's</A><br>
<A>strength: if you saw yourself with your eyes or</A><br>
<A>knew yourself with your judgment, the fear of your</A><br>
<A>adventure would counsel you to a more equal</A><br>
<A>enterprise. We pray you, for your own sake, to</A><br>
<A>embrace your own safety and give over this attempt.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Do, young sir; your reputation shall not therefore</A><br>
<A>be misprised: we will make it our suit to the duke</A><br>
<A>that the wrestling might not go forward.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I beseech you, punish me not with your hard</A><br>
<A>thoughts; wherein I confess me much guilty, to deny</A><br>
<A>so fair and excellent ladies any thing. But let</A><br>
<A>your fair eyes and gentle wishes go with me to my</A><br>
<A>trial: wherein if I be foiled, there is but one</A><br>
<A>shamed that was never gracious; if killed, but one</A><br>
<A>dead that was willing to be so: I shall do my</A><br>
<A>friends no wrong, for I have none to lament me, the</A><br>
<A>world no injury, for in it I have nothing; only in</A><br>
<A>the world I fill up a place, which may be better</A><br>
<A>supplied when I have made it empty.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>The little strength that I have, I would it were with you.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>And mine, to eke out hers.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Fare you well: pray heaven I be deceived in you!</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Your heart's desires be with you!</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Come, where is this young gallant that is so</A><br>
<A>desirous to lie with his mother earth?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Ready, sir; but his will hath in it a more modest working.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Frederick</td>
<blockquote>
<A>You shall try but one fall.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</td>
<blockquote>
<A>No, I warrant your grace, you shall not entreat him</A><br>
<A>to a second, that have so mightily persuaded him</A><br>
<A>from a first.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>An you mean to mock me after, you should not have</A><br>
<A>mocked me before: but come your ways.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Now Hercules be thy speed, young man!</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I would I were invisible, to catch the strong</A><br>
<A>fellow by the leg.</A><br>
<p><i>They wrestle</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>O excellent young man!</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>If I had a thunderbolt in mine eye, I can tell who</A><br>
<A>should down.</A><br>
<p><i>Shout. CHARLES is thrown</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Frederick</td>
<blockquote>
<A>No more, no more.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Yes, I beseech your grace: I am not yet well breathed.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Frederick</td>
<blockquote>
<A>How dost thou, Charles?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Le Beau</td>
<blockquote>
<A>He cannot speak, my lord.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Frederick</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Bear him away. What is thy name, young man?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Orlando, my liege; the youngest son of Sir Rowland de Boys.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Frederick</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I would thou hadst been son to some man else:</A><br>
<A>The world esteem'd thy father honourable,</A><br>
<A>But I did find him still mine enemy:</A><br>
<A>Thou shouldst have better pleased me with this deed,</A><br>
<A>Hadst thou descended from another house.</A><br>
<A>But fare thee well; thou art a gallant youth:</A><br>
<A>I would thou hadst told me of another father.</A><br>
<p><i>Exeunt DUKE FREDERICK, train, and LE BEAU</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Were I my father, coz, would I do this?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I am more proud to be Sir Rowland's son,</A><br>
<A>His youngest son; and would not change that calling,</A><br>
<A>To be adopted heir to Frederick.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>My father loved Sir Rowland as his soul,</A><br>
<A>And all the world was of my father's mind:</A><br>
<A>Had I before known this young man his son,</A><br>
<A>I should have given him tears unto entreaties,</A><br>
<A>Ere he should thus have ventured.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Gentle cousin,</A><br>
<A>Let us go thank him and encourage him:</A><br>
<A>My father's rough and envious disposition</A><br>
<A>Sticks me at heart. Sir, you have well deserved:</A><br>
<A>If you do keep your promises in love</A><br>
<A>But justly, as you have exceeded all promise,</A><br>
<A>Your mistress shall be happy.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Gentleman,</A><br>
<p><i>Giving him a chain from her neck</i></p>
<A>Wear this for me, one out of suits with fortune,</A><br>
<A>That could give more, but that her hand lacks means.</A><br>
<A>Shall we go, coz?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>                  Ay. Fare you well, fair gentleman.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Can I not say, I thank you? My better parts</A><br>
<A>Are all thrown down, and that which here stands up</A><br>
<A>Is but a quintain, a mere lifeless block.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>He calls us back: my pride fell with my fortunes;</A><br>
<A>I'll ask him what he would. Did you call, sir?</A><br>
<A>Sir, you have wrestled well and overthrown</A><br>
<A>More than your enemies.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Will you go, coz?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Have with you. Fare you well.</A><br>
<p><i>Exeunt ROSALIND and CELIA</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>What passion hangs these weights upon my tongue?</A><br>
<A>I cannot speak to her, yet she urged conference.</A><br>
<A>O poor Orlando, thou art overthrown!</A><br>
<A>Or Charles or something weaker masters thee.</A><br>
<p><i>Re-enter LE BEAU</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Le Beau</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Good sir, I do in friendship counsel you</A><br>
<A>To leave this place. Albeit you have deserved</A><br>
<A>High commendation, true applause and love,</A><br>
<A>Yet such is now the duke's condition</A><br>
<A>That he misconstrues all that you have done.</A><br>
<A>The duke is humorous; what he is indeed,</A><br>
<A>More suits you to conceive than I to speak of.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I thank you, sir: and, pray you, tell me this:</A><br>
<A>Which of the two was daughter of the duke</A><br>
<A>That here was at the wrestling?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Le Beau</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Neither his daughter, if we judge by manners;</A><br>
<A>But yet indeed the lesser is his daughter</A><br>
<A>The other is daughter to the banish'd duke,</A><br>
<A>And here detain'd by her usurping uncle,</A><br>
<A>To keep his daughter company; whose loves</A><br>
<A>Are dearer than the natural bond of sisters.</A><br>
<A>But I can tell you that of late this duke</A><br>
<A>Hath ta'en displeasure 'gainst his gentle niece,</A><br>
<A>Grounded upon no other argument</A><br>
<A>But that the people praise her for her virtues</A><br>
<A>And pity her for her good father's sake;</A><br>
<A>And, on my life, his malice 'gainst the lady</A><br>
<A>Will suddenly break forth. Sir, fare you well:</A><br>
<A>Hereafter, in a better world than this,</A><br>
<A>I shall desire more love and knowledge of you.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I rest much bounden to you: fare you well.</A><br>
<p><i>Exit LE BEAU</i></p>
<A>Thus must I from the smoke into the smother;</A><br>
<A>From tyrant duke unto a tyrant brother:</A><br>
<A>But heavenly Rosalind!</A><br>
<p><i>Exit</i></p>
</blockquote>
<h3>SCENE III. A room in the palace.</h3>
<p><blockquote>
<i>Enter CELIA and ROSALIND</i>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Why, cousin! why, Rosalind! Cupid have mercy! not a word?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Not one to throw at a dog.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>No, thy words are too precious to be cast away upon</A><br>
<A>curs; throw some of them at me; come, lame me with reasons.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Then there were two cousins laid up; when the one</A><br>
<A>should be lamed with reasons and the other mad</A><br>
<A>without any.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>But is all this for your father?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>No, some of it is for my child's father. O, how</A><br>
<A>full of briers is this working-day world!</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>They are but burs, cousin, thrown upon thee in</A><br>
<A>holiday foolery: if we walk not in the trodden</A><br>
<A>paths our very petticoats will catch them.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I could shake them off my coat: these burs are in my heart.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Hem them away.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I would try, if I could cry 'hem' and have him.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Come, come, wrestle with thy affections.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>O, they take the part of a better wrestler than myself!</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>O, a good wish upon you! you will try in time, in</A><br>
<A>despite of a fall. But, turning these jests out of</A><br>
<A>service, let us talk in good earnest: is it</A><br>
<A>possible, on such a sudden, you should fall into so</A><br>
<A>strong a liking with old Sir Rowland's youngest son?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>The duke my father loved his father dearly.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Doth it therefore ensue that you should love his son</A><br>
<A>dearly? By this kind of chase, I should hate him,</A><br>
<A>for my father hated his father dearly; yet I hate</A><br>
<A>not Orlando.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>No, faith, hate him not, for my sake.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Why should I not? doth he not deserve well?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Let me love him for that, and do you love him</A><br>
<A>because I do. Look, here comes the duke.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>With his eyes full of anger.</A><br>
<p><i>Enter DUKE FREDERICK, with Lords</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Frederick</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Mistress, dispatch you with your safest haste</A><br>
<A>And get you from our court.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Me, uncle?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Frederick</td>
<blockquote>
<A>You, cousin</A><br>
<A>Within these ten days if that thou be'st found</A><br>
<A>So near our public court as twenty miles,</A><br>
<A>Thou diest for it.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>                  I do beseech your grace,</A><br>
<A>Let me the knowledge of my fault bear with me:</A><br>
<A>If with myself I hold intelligence</A><br>
<A>Or have acquaintance with mine own desires,</A><br>
<A>If that I do not dream or be not frantic,--</A><br>
<A>As I do trust I am not--then, dear uncle,</A><br>
<A>Never so much as in a thought unborn</A><br>
<A>Did I offend your highness.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Frederick</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Thus do all traitors:</A><br>
<A>If their purgation did consist in words,</A><br>
<A>They are as innocent as grace itself:</A><br>
<A>Let it suffice thee that I trust thee not.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Yet your mistrust cannot make me a traitor:</A><br>
<A>Tell me whereon the likelihood depends.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Frederick</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Thou art thy father's daughter; there's enough.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>So was I when your highness took his dukedom;</A><br>
<A>So was I when your highness banish'd him:</A><br>
<A>Treason is not inherited, my lord;</A><br>
<A>Or, if we did derive it from our friends,</A><br>
<A>What's that to me? my father was no traitor:</A><br>
<A>Then, good my liege, mistake me not so much</A><br>
<A>To think my poverty is treacherous.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Dear sovereign, hear me speak.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Frederick</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Ay, Celia; we stay'd her for your sake,</A><br>
<A>Else had she with her father ranged along.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I did not then entreat to have her stay;</A><br>
<A>It was your pleasure and your own remorse:</A><br>
<A>I was too young that time to value her;</A><br>
<A>But now I know her: if she be a traitor,</A><br>
<A>Why so am I; we still have slept together,</A><br>
<A>Rose at an instant, learn'd, play'd, eat together,</A><br>
<A>And wheresoever we went, like Juno's swans,</A><br>
<A>Still we went coupled and inseparable.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Frederick</td>
<blockquote>
<A>She is too subtle for thee; and her smoothness,</A><br>
<A>Her very silence and her patience</A><br>
<A>Speak to the people, and they pity her.</A><br>
<A>Thou art a fool: she robs thee of thy name;</A><br>
<A>And thou wilt show more bright and seem more virtuous</A><br>
<A>When she is gone. Then open not thy lips:</A><br>
<A>Firm and irrevocable is my doom</A><br>
<A>Which I have pass'd upon her; she is banish'd.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Pronounce that sentence then on me, my liege:</A><br>
<A>I cannot live out of her company.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Frederick</td>
<blockquote>
<A>You are a fool. You, niece, provide yourself:</A><br>
<A>If you outstay the time, upon mine honour,</A><br>
<A>And in the greatness of my word, you die.</A><br>
<p><i>Exeunt DUKE FREDERICK and Lords</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>O my poor Rosalind, whither wilt thou go?</A><br>
<A>Wilt thou change fathers? I will give thee mine.</A><br>
<A>I charge thee, be not thou more grieved than I am.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I have more cause.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>                  Thou hast not, cousin;</A><br>
<A>Prithee be cheerful: know'st thou not, the duke</A><br>
<A>Hath banish'd me, his daughter?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>That he hath not.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>No, hath not? Rosalind lacks then the love</A><br>
<A>Which teacheth thee that thou and I am one:</A><br>
<A>Shall we be sunder'd? shall we part, sweet girl?</A><br>
<A>No: let my father seek another heir.</A><br>
<A>Therefore devise with me how we may fly,</A><br>
<A>Whither to go and what to bear with us;</A><br>
<A>And do not seek to take your change upon you,</A><br>
<A>To bear your griefs yourself and leave me out;</A><br>
<A>For, by this heaven, now at our sorrows pale,</A><br>
<A>Say what thou canst, I'll go along with thee.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Why, whither shall we go?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>To seek my uncle in the forest of Arden.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Alas, what danger will it be to us,</A><br>
<A>Maids as we are, to travel forth so far!</A><br>
<A>Beauty provoketh thieves sooner than gold.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I'll put myself in poor and mean attire</A><br>
<A>And with a kind of umber smirch my face;</A><br>
<A>The like do you: so shall we pass along</A><br>
<A>And never stir assailants.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Were it not better,</A><br>
<A>Because that I am more than common tall,</A><br>
<A>That I did suit me all points like a man?</A><br>
<A>A gallant curtle-axe upon my thigh,</A><br>
<A>A boar-spear in my hand; and--in my heart</A><br>
<A>Lie there what hidden woman's fear there will--</A><br>
<A>We'll have a swashing and a martial outside,</A><br>
<A>As many other mannish cowards have</A><br>
<A>That do outface it with their semblances.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>What shall I call thee when thou art a man?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I'll have no worse a name than Jove's own page;</A><br>
<A>And therefore look you call me Ganymede.</A><br>
<A>But what will you be call'd?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Something that hath a reference to my state</A><br>
<A>No longer Celia, but Aliena.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>But, cousin, what if we assay'd to steal</A><br>
<A>The clownish fool out of your father's court?</A><br>
<A>Would he not be a comfort to our travel?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>He'll go along o'er the wide world with me;</A><br>
<A>Leave me alone to woo him. Let's away,</A><br>
<A>And get our jewels and our wealth together,</A><br>
<A>Devise the fittest time and safest way</A><br>
<A>To hide us from pursuit that will be made</A><br>
<A>After my flight. Now go we in content</A><br>
<A>To liberty and not to banishment.</A><br>
<p><i>Exeunt</i></p>
</blockquote><p>
<H3>ACT II</h3>
<h3>SCENE I. The Forest of Arden.</h3>
<p><blockquote>
<i>Enter DUKE SENIOR, AMIENS, and two or three Lords, like foresters</i>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Now, my co-mates and brothers in exile,</A><br>
<A>Hath not old custom made this life more sweet</A><br>
<A>Than that of painted pomp? Are not these woods</A><br>
<A>More free from peril than the envious court?</A><br>
<A>Here feel we but the penalty of Adam,</A><br>
<A>The seasons' difference, as the icy fang</A><br>
<A>And churlish chiding of the winter's wind,</A><br>
<A>Which, when it bites and blows upon my body,</A><br>
<A>Even till I shrink with cold, I smile and say</A><br>
<A>'This is no flattery: these are counsellors</A><br>
<A>That feelingly persuade me what I am.'</A><br>
<A>Sweet are the uses of adversity,</A><br>
<A>Which, like the toad, ugly and venomous,</A><br>
<A>Wears yet a precious jewel in his head;</A><br>
<A>And this our life exempt from public haunt</A><br>
<A>Finds tongues in trees, books in the running brooks,</A><br>
<A>Sermons in stones and good in every thing.</A><br>
<A>I would not change it.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Amiens</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Happy is your grace,</A><br>
<A>That can translate the stubbornness of fortune</A><br>
<A>Into so quiet and so sweet a style.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Come, shall we go and kill us venison?</A><br>
<A>And yet it irks me the poor dappled fools,</A><br>
<A>Being native burghers of this desert city,</A><br>
<A>Should in their own confines with forked heads</A><br>
<A>Have their round haunches gored.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Lord</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Indeed, my lord,</A><br>
<A>The melancholy Jaques grieves at that,</A><br>
<A>And, in that kind, swears you do more usurp</A><br>
<A>Than doth your brother that hath banish'd you.</A><br>
<A>To-day my Lord of Amiens and myself</A><br>
<A>Did steal behind him as he lay along</A><br>
<A>Under an oak whose antique root peeps out</A><br>
<A>Upon the brook that brawls along this wood:</A><br>
<A>To the which place a poor sequester'd stag,</A><br>
<A>That from the hunter's aim had ta'en a hurt,</A><br>
<A>Did come to languish, and indeed, my lord,</A><br>
<A>The wretched animal heaved forth such groans</A><br>
<A>That their discharge did stretch his leathern coat</A><br>
<A>Almost to bursting, and the big round tears</A><br>
<A>Coursed one another down his innocent nose</A><br>
<A>In piteous chase; and thus the hairy fool</A><br>
<A>Much marked of the melancholy Jaques,</A><br>
<A>Stood on the extremest verge of the swift brook,</A><br>
<A>Augmenting it with tears.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
<blockquote>
<A>But what said Jaques?</A><br>
<A>Did he not moralize this spectacle?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Lord</td>
<blockquote>
<A>O, yes, into a thousand similes.</A><br>
<A>First, for his weeping into the needless stream;</A><br>
<A>'Poor deer,' quoth he, 'thou makest a testament</A><br>
<A>As worldlings do, giving thy sum of more</A><br>
<A>To that which had too much:' then, being there alone,</A><br>
<A>Left and abandon'd of his velvet friends,</A><br>
<A>''Tis right:' quoth he; 'thus misery doth part</A><br>
<A>The flux of company:' anon a careless herd,</A><br>
<A>Full of the pasture, jumps along by him</A><br>
<A>And never stays to greet him; 'Ay' quoth Jaques,</A><br>
<A>'Sweep on, you fat and greasy citizens;</A><br>
<A>'Tis just the fashion: wherefore do you look</A><br>
<A>Upon that poor and broken bankrupt there?'</A><br>
<A>Thus most invectively he pierceth through</A><br>
<A>The body of the country, city, court,</A><br>
<A>Yea, and of this our life, swearing that we</A><br>
<A>Are mere usurpers, tyrants and what's worse,</A><br>
<A>To fright the animals and to kill them up</A><br>
<A>In their assign'd and native dwelling-place.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
<blockquote>
<A>And did you leave him in this contemplation?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Lord</td>
<blockquote>
<A>We did, my lord, weeping and commenting</A><br>
<A>Upon the sobbing deer.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Show me the place:</A><br>
<A>I love to cope him in these sullen fits,</A><br>
<A>For then he's full of matter.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Lord</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I'll bring you to him straight.</A><br>
<p><i>Exeunt</i></p>
</blockquote>
<h3>SCENE II. A room in the palace.</h3>
<p><blockquote>
<i>Enter DUKE FREDERICK, with Lords</i>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Frederick</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Can it be possible that no man saw them?</A><br>
<A>It cannot be: some villains of my court</A><br>
<A>Are of consent and sufferance in this.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Lord</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I cannot hear of any that did see her.</A><br>
<A>The ladies, her attendants of her chamber,</A><br>
<A>Saw her abed, and in the morning early</A><br>
<A>They found the bed untreasured of their mistress.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Lord</td>
<blockquote>
<A>My lord, the roynish clown, at whom so oft</A><br>
<A>Your grace was wont to laugh, is also missing.</A><br>
<A>Hisperia, the princess' gentlewoman,</A><br>
<A>Confesses that she secretly o'erheard</A><br>
<A>Your daughter and her cousin much commend</A><br>
<A>The parts and graces of the wrestler</A><br>
<A>That did but lately foil the sinewy Charles;</A><br>
<A>And she believes, wherever they are gone,</A><br>
<A>That youth is surely in their company.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Frederick</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Send to his brother; fetch that gallant hither;</A><br>
<A>If he be absent, bring his brother to me;</A><br>
<A>I'll make him find him: do this suddenly,</A><br>
<A>And let not search and inquisition quail</A><br>
<A>To bring again these foolish runaways.</A><br>
<p><i>Exeunt</i></p>
</blockquote>
<h3>SCENE III. Before OLIVER'S house.</h3>
<p><blockquote>
<i>Enter ORLANDO and ADAM, meeting</i>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Who's there?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
<blockquote>
<A>What, my young master? O, my gentle master!</A><br>
<A>O my sweet master! O you memory</A><br>
<A>Of old Sir Rowland! why, what make you here?</A><br>
<A>Why are you virtuous? why do people love you?</A><br>
<A>And wherefore are you gentle, strong and valiant?</A><br>
<A>Why would you be so fond to overcome</A><br>
<A>The bonny priser of the humorous duke?</A><br>
<A>Your praise is come too swiftly home before you.</A><br>
<A>Know you not, master, to some kind of men</A><br>
<A>Their graces serve them but as enemies?</A><br>
<A>No more do yours: your virtues, gentle master,</A><br>
<A>Are sanctified and holy traitors to you.</A><br>
<A>O, what a world is this, when what is comely</A><br>
<A>Envenoms him that bears it!</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Why, what's the matter?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
<blockquote>
<A>O unhappy youth!</A><br>
<A>Come not within these doors; within this roof</A><br>
<A>The enemy of all your graces lives:</A><br>
<A>Your brother--no, no brother; yet the son--</A><br>
<A>Yet not the son, I will not call him son</A><br>
<A>Of him I was about to call his father--</A><br>
<A>Hath heard your praises, and this night he means</A><br>
<A>To burn the lodging where you use to lie</A><br>
<A>And you within it: if he fail of that,</A><br>
<A>He will have other means to cut you off.</A><br>
<A>I overheard him and his practises.</A><br>
<A>This is no place; this house is but a butchery:</A><br>
<A>Abhor it, fear it, do not enter it.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Why, whither, Adam, wouldst thou have me go?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
<blockquote>
<A>No matter whither, so you come not here.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>What, wouldst thou have me go and beg my food?</A><br>
<A>Or with a base and boisterous sword enforce</A><br>
<A>A thievish living on the common road?</A><br>
<A>This I must do, or know not what to do:</A><br>
<A>Yet this I will not do, do how I can;</A><br>
<A>I rather will subject me to the malice</A><br>
<A>Of a diverted blood and bloody brother.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
<blockquote>
<A>But do not so. I have five hundred crowns,</A><br>
<A>The thrifty hire I saved under your father,</A><br>
<A>Which I did store to be my foster-nurse</A><br>
<A>When service should in my old limbs lie lame</A><br>
<A>And unregarded age in corners thrown:</A><br>
<A>Take that, and He that doth the ravens feed,</A><br>
<A>Yea, providently caters for the sparrow,</A><br>
<A>Be comfort to my age! Here is the gold;</A><br>
<A>And all this I give you. Let me be your servant:</A><br>
<A>Though I look old, yet I am strong and lusty;</A><br>
<A>For in my youth I never did apply</A><br>
<A>Hot and rebellious liquors in my blood,</A><br>
<A>Nor did not with unbashful forehead woo</A><br>
<A>The means of weakness and debility;</A><br>
<A>Therefore my age is as a lusty winter,</A><br>
<A>Frosty, but kindly: let me go with you;</A><br>
<A>I'll do the service of a younger man</A><br>
<A>In all your business and necessities.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>O good old man, how well in thee appears</A><br>
<A>The constant service of the antique world,</A><br>
<A>When service sweat for duty, not for meed!</A><br>
<A>Thou art not for the fashion of these times,</A><br>
<A>Where none will sweat but for promotion,</A><br>
<A>And having that, do choke their service up</A><br>
<A>Even with the having: it is not so with thee.</A><br>
<A>But, poor old man, thou prunest a rotten tree,</A><br>
<A>That cannot so much as a blossom yield</A><br>
<A>In lieu of all thy pains and husbandry</A><br>
<A>But come thy ways; well go along together,</A><br>
<A>And ere we have thy youthful wages spent,</A><br>
<A>We'll light upon some settled low content.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Master, go on, and I will follow thee,</A><br>
<A>To the last gasp, with truth and loyalty.</A><br>
<A>From seventeen years till now almost fourscore</A><br>
<A>Here lived I, but now live here no more.</A><br>
<A>At seventeen years many their fortunes seek;</A><br>
<A>But at fourscore it is too late a week:</A><br>
<A>Yet fortune cannot recompense me better</A><br>
<A>Than to die well and not my master's debtor.</A><br>
<p><i>Exeunt</i></p>
</blockquote>
<h3>SCENE IV. The Forest of Arden.</h3>
<p><blockquote>
<i>Enter ROSALIND for Ganymede, CELIA for Aliena, and TOUCHSTONE</i>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>O Jupiter, how weary are my spirits!</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I care not for my spirits, if my legs were not weary.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I could find in my heart to disgrace my man's</A><br>
<A>apparel and to cry like a woman; but I must comfort</A><br>
<A>the weaker vessel, as doublet and hose ought to show</A><br>
<A>itself courageous to petticoat: therefore courage,</A><br>
<A>good Aliena!</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I pray you, bear with me; I cannot go no further.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>For my part, I had rather bear with you than bear</A><br>
<A>you; yet I should bear no cross if I did bear you,</A><br>
<A>for I think you have no money in your purse.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Well, this is the forest of Arden.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Ay, now am I in Arden; the more fool I; when I was</A><br>
<A>at home, I was in a better place: but travellers</A><br>
<A>must be content.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Ay, be so, good Touchstone.</A><br>
<p><i>Enter CORIN and SILVIUS</i></p>
<A>Look you, who comes here; a young man and an old in</A><br>
<A>solemn talk.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corin</td>
<blockquote>
<A>That is the way to make her scorn you still.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</td>
<blockquote>
<A>O Corin, that thou knew'st how I do love her!</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corin</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I partly guess; for I have loved ere now.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</td>
<blockquote>
<A>No, Corin, being old, thou canst not guess,</A><br>
<A>Though in thy youth thou wast as true a lover</A><br>
<A>As ever sigh'd upon a midnight pillow:</A><br>
<A>But if thy love were ever like to mine--</A><br>
<A>As sure I think did never man love so--</A><br>
<A>How many actions most ridiculous</A><br>
<A>Hast thou been drawn to by thy fantasy?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corin</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Into a thousand that I have forgotten.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</td>
<blockquote>
<A>O, thou didst then ne'er love so heartily!</A><br>
<A>If thou remember'st not the slightest folly</A><br>
<A>That ever love did make thee run into,</A><br>
<A>Thou hast not loved:</A><br>
<A>Or if thou hast not sat as I do now,</A><br>
<A>Wearying thy hearer in thy mistress' praise,</A><br>
<A>Thou hast not loved:</A><br>
<A>Or if thou hast not broke from company</A><br>
<A>Abruptly, as my passion now makes me,</A><br>
<A>Thou hast not loved.</A><br>
<A>O Phebe, Phebe, Phebe!</A><br>
<p><i>Exit</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Alas, poor shepherd! searching of thy wound,</A><br>
<A>I have by hard adventure found mine own.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>And I mine. I remember, when I was in love I broke</A><br>
<A>my sword upon a stone and bid him take that for</A><br>
<A>coming a-night to Jane Smile; and I remember the</A><br>
<A>kissing of her batlet and the cow's dugs that her</A><br>
<A>pretty chopt hands had milked; and I remember the</A><br>
<A>wooing of a peascod instead of her, from whom I took</A><br>
<A>two cods and, giving her them again, said with</A><br>
<A>weeping tears 'Wear these for my sake.' We that are</A><br>
<A>true lovers run into strange capers; but as all is</A><br>
<A>mortal in nature, so is all nature in love mortal in folly.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Thou speakest wiser than thou art ware of.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Nay, I shall ne'er be ware of mine own wit till I</A><br>
<A>break my shins against it.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Jove, Jove! this shepherd's passion</A><br>
<A>Is much upon my fashion.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>And mine; but it grows something stale with me.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I pray you, one of you question yond man</A><br>
<A>If he for gold will give us any food:</A><br>
<A>I faint almost to death.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Holla, you clown!</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Peace, fool: he's not thy kinsman.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corin</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Who calls?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Your betters, sir.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corin</td>
<blockquote>
<A>                  Else are they very wretched.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Peace, I say. Good even to you, friend.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corin</td>
<blockquote>
<A>And to you, gentle sir, and to you all.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I prithee, shepherd, if that love or gold</A><br>
<A>Can in this desert place buy entertainment,</A><br>
<A>Bring us where we may rest ourselves and feed:</A><br>
<A>Here's a young maid with travel much oppress'd</A><br>
<A>And faints for succor.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corin</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Fair sir, I pity her</A><br>
<A>And wish, for her sake more than for mine own,</A><br>
<A>My fortunes were more able to relieve her;</A><br>
<A>But I am shepherd to another man</A><br>
<A>And do not shear the fleeces that I graze:</A><br>
<A>My master is of churlish disposition</A><br>
<A>And little recks to find the way to heaven</A><br>
<A>By doing deeds of hospitality:</A><br>
<A>Besides, his cote, his flocks and bounds of feed</A><br>
<A>Are now on sale, and at our sheepcote now,</A><br>
<A>By reason of his absence, there is nothing</A><br>
<A>That you will feed on; but what is, come see.</A><br>
<A>And in my voice most welcome shall you be.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>What is he that shall buy his flock and pasture?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corin</td>
<blockquote>
<A>That young swain that you saw here but erewhile,</A><br>
<A>That little cares for buying any thing.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I pray thee, if it stand with honesty,</A><br>
<A>Buy thou the cottage, pasture and the flock,</A><br>
<A>And thou shalt have to pay for it of us.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>And we will mend thy wages. I like this place.</A><br>
<A>And willingly could waste my time in it.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corin</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Assuredly the thing is to be sold:</A><br>
<A>Go with me: if you like upon report</A><br>
<A>The soil, the profit and this kind of life,</A><br>
<A>I will your very faithful feeder be</A><br>
<A>And buy it with your gold right suddenly.</A><br>
<p><i>Exeunt</i></p>
</blockquote>
<h3>SCENE V. The Forest.</h3>
<p><blockquote>
<i>Enter AMIENS, JAQUES, and others</i>
</blockquote>
<blockquote>
<A>SONG.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Amiens</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Under the greenwood tree</A><br>
<A>Who loves to lie with me,</A><br>
<A>And turn his merry note</A><br>
<A>Unto the sweet bird's throat,</A><br>
<A>Come hither, come hither, come hither:</A><br>
<A>Here shall he see No enemy</A><br>
<A>But winter and rough weather.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>More, more, I prithee, more.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Amiens</td>
<blockquote>
<A>It will make you melancholy, Monsieur Jaques.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I thank it. More, I prithee, more. I can suck</A><br>
<A>melancholy out of a song, as a weasel sucks eggs.</A><br>
<A>More, I prithee, more.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Amiens</td>
<blockquote>
<A>My voice is ragged: I know I cannot please you.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I do not desire you to please me; I do desire you to</A><br>
<A>sing. Come, more; another stanzo: call you 'em stanzos?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Amiens</td>
<blockquote>
<A>What you will, Monsieur Jaques.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Nay, I care not for their names; they owe me</A><br>
<A>nothing. Will you sing?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Amiens</td>
<blockquote>
<A>More at your request than to please myself.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Well then, if ever I thank any man, I'll thank you;</A><br>
<A>but that they call compliment is like the encounter</A><br>
<A>of two dog-apes, and when a man thanks me heartily,</A><br>
<A>methinks I have given him a penny and he renders me</A><br>
<A>the beggarly thanks. Come, sing; and you that will</A><br>
<A>not, hold your tongues.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Amiens</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Well, I'll end the song. Sirs, cover the while; the</A><br>
<A>duke will drink under this tree. He hath been all</A><br>
<A>this day to look you.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>And I have been all this day to avoid him. He is</A><br>
<A>too disputable for my company: I think of as many</A><br>
<A>matters as he, but I give heaven thanks and make no</A><br>
<A>boast of them. Come, warble, come.</A><br>
<A>SONG.</A><br>
<A>Who doth ambition shun</A><br>
<p><i>All together here</i></p>
<A>And loves to live i' the sun,</A><br>
<A>Seeking the food he eats</A><br>
<A>And pleased with what he gets,</A><br>
<A>Come hither, come hither, come hither:</A><br>
<A>Here shall he see No enemy</A><br>
<A>But winter and rough weather.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I'll give you a verse to this note that I made</A><br>
<A>yesterday in despite of my invention.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Amiens</td>
<blockquote>
<A>And I'll sing it.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Thus it goes:--</A><br>
<A>If it do come to pass</A><br>
<A>That any man turn ass,</A><br>
<A>Leaving his wealth and ease,</A><br>
<A>A stubborn will to please,</A><br>
<A>Ducdame, ducdame, ducdame:</A><br>
<A>Here shall he see</A><br>
<A>Gross fools as he,</A><br>
<A>An if he will come to me.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Amiens</td>
<blockquote>
<A>What's that 'ducdame'?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>'Tis a Greek invocation, to call fools into a</A><br>
<A>circle. I'll go sleep, if I can; if I cannot, I'll</A><br>
<A>rail against all the first-born of Egypt.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Amiens</td>
<blockquote>
<A>And I'll go seek the duke: his banquet is prepared.</A><br>
<p><i>Exeunt severally</i></p>
</blockquote>
<h3>SCENE VI. The forest.</h3>
<p><blockquote>
<i>Enter ORLANDO and ADAM</i>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Dear master, I can go no further. O, I die for food!</A><br>
<A>Here lie I down, and measure out my grave. Farewell,</A><br>
<A>kind master.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Why, how now, Adam! no greater heart in thee? Live</A><br>
<A>a little; comfort a little; cheer thyself a little.</A><br>
<A>If this uncouth forest yield any thing savage, I</A><br>
<A>will either be food for it or bring it for food to</A><br>
<A>thee. Thy conceit is nearer death than thy powers.</A><br>
<A>For my sake be comfortable; hold death awhile at</A><br>
<A>the arm's end: I will here be with thee presently;</A><br>
<A>and if I bring thee not something to eat, I will</A><br>
<A>give thee leave to die: but if thou diest before I</A><br>
<A>come, thou art a mocker of my labour. Well said!</A><br>
<A>thou lookest cheerly, and I'll be with thee quickly.</A><br>
<A>Yet thou liest in the bleak air: come, I will bear</A><br>
<A>thee to some shelter; and thou shalt not die for</A><br>
<A>lack of a dinner, if there live any thing in this</A><br>
<A>desert. Cheerly, good Adam!</A><br>
<p><i>Exeunt</i></p>
</blockquote>
<h3>SCENE VII. The forest.</h3>
<p><blockquote>
<i>A table set out. Enter DUKE SENIOR, AMIENS, and Lords like outlaws</i>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I think he be transform'd into a beast;</A><br>
<A>For I can no where find him like a man.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Lord</td>
<blockquote>
<A>My lord, he is but even now gone hence:</A><br>
<A>Here was he merry, hearing of a song.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
<blockquote>
<A>If he, compact of jars, grow musical,</A><br>
<A>We shall have shortly discord in the spheres.</A><br>
<A>Go, seek him: tell him I would speak with him.</A><br>
<p><i>Enter JAQUES</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Lord</td>
<blockquote>
<A>He saves my labour by his own approach.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Why, how now, monsieur! what a life is this,</A><br>
<A>That your poor friends must woo your company?</A><br>
<A>What, you look merrily!</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>A fool, a fool! I met a fool i' the forest,</A><br>
<A>A motley fool; a miserable world!</A><br>
<A>As I do live by food, I met a fool</A><br>
<A>Who laid him down and bask'd him in the sun,</A><br>
<A>And rail'd on Lady Fortune in good terms,</A><br>
<A>In good set terms and yet a motley fool.</A><br>
<A>'Good morrow, fool,' quoth I. 'No, sir,' quoth he,</A><br>
<A>'Call me not fool till heaven hath sent me fortune:'</A><br>
<A>And then he drew a dial from his poke,</A><br>
<A>And, looking on it with lack-lustre eye,</A><br>
<A>Says very wisely, 'It is ten o'clock:</A><br>
<A>Thus we may see,' quoth he, 'how the world wags:</A><br>
<A>'Tis but an hour ago since it was nine,</A><br>
<A>And after one hour more 'twill be eleven;</A><br>
<A>And so, from hour to hour, we ripe and ripe,</A><br>
<A>And then, from hour to hour, we rot and rot;</A><br>
<A>And thereby hangs a tale.' When I did hear</A><br>
<A>The motley fool thus moral on the time,</A><br>
<A>My lungs began to crow like chanticleer,</A><br>
<A>That fools should be so deep-contemplative,</A><br>
<A>And I did laugh sans intermission</A><br>
<A>An hour by his dial. O noble fool!</A><br>
<A>A worthy fool! Motley's the only wear.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
<blockquote>
<A>What fool is this?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>O worthy fool! One that hath been a courtier,</A><br>
<A>And says, if ladies be but young and fair,</A><br>
<A>They have the gift to know it: and in his brain,</A><br>
<A>Which is as dry as the remainder biscuit</A><br>
<A>After a voyage, he hath strange places cramm'd</A><br>
<A>With observation, the which he vents</A><br>
<A>In mangled forms. O that I were a fool!</A><br>
<A>I am ambitious for a motley coat.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Thou shalt have one.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>It is my only suit;</A><br>
<A>Provided that you weed your better judgments</A><br>
<A>Of all opinion that grows rank in them</A><br>
<A>That I am wise. I must have liberty</A><br>
<A>Withal, as large a charter as the wind,</A><br>
<A>To blow on whom I please; for so fools have;</A><br>
<A>And they that are most galled with my folly,</A><br>
<A>They most must laugh. And why, sir, must they so?</A><br>
<A>The 'why' is plain as way to parish church:</A><br>
<A>He that a fool doth very wisely hit</A><br>
<A>Doth very foolishly, although he smart,</A><br>
<A>Not to seem senseless of the bob: if not,</A><br>
<A>The wise man's folly is anatomized</A><br>
<A>Even by the squandering glances of the fool.</A><br>
<A>Invest me in my motley; give me leave</A><br>
<A>To speak my mind, and I will through and through</A><br>
<A>Cleanse the foul body of the infected world,</A><br>
<A>If they will patiently receive my medicine.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Fie on thee! I can tell what thou wouldst do.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>What, for a counter, would I do but good?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Most mischievous foul sin, in chiding sin:</A><br>
<A>For thou thyself hast been a libertine,</A><br>
<A>As sensual as the brutish sting itself;</A><br>
<A>And all the embossed sores and headed evils,</A><br>
<A>That thou with licence of free foot hast caught,</A><br>
<A>Wouldst thou disgorge into the general world.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Why, who cries out on pride,</A><br>
<A>That can therein tax any private party?</A><br>
<A>Doth it not flow as hugely as the sea,</A><br>
<A>Till that the weary very means do ebb?</A><br>
<A>What woman in the city do I name,</A><br>
<A>When that I say the city-woman bears</A><br>
<A>The cost of princes on unworthy shoulders?</A><br>
<A>Who can come in and say that I mean her,</A><br>
<A>When such a one as she such is her neighbour?</A><br>
<A>Or what is he of basest function</A><br>
<A>That says his bravery is not of my cost,</A><br>
<A>Thinking that I mean him, but therein suits</A><br>
<A>His folly to the mettle of my speech?</A><br>
<A>There then; how then? what then? Let me see wherein</A><br>
<A>My tongue hath wrong'd him: if it do him right,</A><br>
<A>Then he hath wrong'd himself; if he be free,</A><br>
<A>Why then my taxing like a wild-goose flies,</A><br>
<A>Unclaim'd of any man. But who comes here?</A><br>
<p><i>Enter ORLANDO, with his sword drawn</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Forbear, and eat no more.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Why, I have eat none yet.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Nor shalt not, till necessity be served.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Of what kind should this cock come of?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Art thou thus bolden'd, man, by thy distress,</A><br>
<A>Or else a rude despiser of good manners,</A><br>
<A>That in civility thou seem'st so empty?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>You touch'd my vein at first: the thorny point</A><br>
<A>Of bare distress hath ta'en from me the show</A><br>
<A>Of smooth civility: yet am I inland bred</A><br>
<A>And know some nurture. But forbear, I say:</A><br>
<A>He dies that touches any of this fruit</A><br>
<A>Till I and my affairs are answered.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>An you will not be answered with reason, I must die.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
<blockquote>
<A>What would you have? Your gentleness shall force</A><br>
<A>More than your force move us to gentleness.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I almost die for food; and let me have it.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Sit down and feed, and welcome to our table.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Speak you so gently? Pardon me, I pray you:</A><br>
<A>I thought that all things had been savage here;</A><br>
<A>And therefore put I on the countenance</A><br>
<A>Of stern commandment. But whate'er you are</A><br>
<A>That in this desert inaccessible,</A><br>
<A>Under the shade of melancholy boughs,</A><br>
<A>Lose and neglect the creeping hours of time</A><br>
<A>If ever you have look'd on better days,</A><br>
<A>If ever been where bells have knoll'd to church,</A><br>
<A>If ever sat at any good man's feast,</A><br>
<A>If ever from your eyelids wiped a tear</A><br>
<A>And know what 'tis to pity and be pitied,</A><br>
<A>Let gentleness my strong enforcement be:</A><br>
<A>In the which hope I blush, and hide my sword.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
<blockquote>
<A>True is it that we have seen better days,</A><br>
<A>And have with holy bell been knoll'd to church</A><br>
<A>And sat at good men's feasts and wiped our eyes</A><br>
<A>Of drops that sacred pity hath engender'd:</A><br>
<A>And therefore sit you down in gentleness</A><br>
<A>And take upon command what help we have</A><br>
<A>That to your wanting may be minister'd.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Then but forbear your food a little while,</A><br>
<A>Whiles, like a doe, I go to find my fawn</A><br>
<A>And give it food. There is an old poor man,</A><br>
<A>Who after me hath many a weary step</A><br>
<A>Limp'd in pure love: till he be first sufficed,</A><br>
<A>Oppress'd with two weak evils, age and hunger,</A><br>
<A>I will not touch a bit.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Go find him out,</A><br>
<A>And we will nothing waste till you return.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I thank ye; and be blest for your good comfort!</A><br>
<p><i>Exit</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Thou seest we are not all alone unhappy:</A><br>
<A>This wide and universal theatre</A><br>
<A>Presents more woeful pageants than the scene</A><br>
<A>Wherein we play in.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>All the world's a stage,</A><br>
<A>And all the men and women merely players:</A><br>
<A>They have their exits and their entrances;</A><br>
<A>And one man in his time plays many parts,</A><br>
<A>His acts being seven ages. At first the infant,</A><br>
<A>Mewling and puking in the nurse's arms.</A><br>
<A>And then the whining school-boy, with his satchel</A><br>
<A>And shining morning face, creeping like snail</A><br>
<A>Unwillingly to school. And then the lover,</A><br>
<A>Sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad</A><br>
<A>Made to his mistress' eyebrow. Then a soldier,</A><br>
<A>Full of strange oaths and bearded like the pard,</A><br>
<A>Jealous in honour, sudden and quick in quarrel,</A><br>
<A>Seeking the bubble reputation</A><br>
<A>Even in the cannon's mouth. And then the justice,</A><br>
<A>In fair round belly with good capon lined,</A><br>
<A>With eyes severe and beard of formal cut,</A><br>
<A>Full of wise saws and modern instances;</A><br>
<A>And so he plays his part. The sixth age shifts</A><br>
<A>Into the lean and slipper'd pantaloon,</A><br>
<A>With spectacles on nose and pouch on side,</A><br>
<A>His youthful hose, well saved, a world too wide</A><br>
<A>For his shrunk shank; and his big manly voice,</A><br>
<A>Turning again toward childish treble, pipes</A><br>
<A>And whistles in his sound. Last scene of all,</A><br>
<A>That ends this strange eventful history,</A><br>
<A>Is second childishness and mere oblivion,</A><br>
<A>Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything.</A><br>
<p><i>Re-enter ORLANDO, with ADAM</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Welcome. Set down your venerable burthen,</A><br>
<A>And let him feed.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I thank you most for him.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
<blockquote>
<A>So had you need:</A><br>
<A>I scarce can speak to thank you for myself.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Welcome; fall to: I will not trouble you</A><br>
<A>As yet, to question you about your fortunes.</A><br>
<A>Give us some music; and, good cousin, sing.</A><br>
<A>SONG.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Amiens</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Blow, blow, thou winter wind.</A><br>
<A>Thou art not so unkind</A><br>
<A>As man's ingratitude;</A><br>
<A>Thy tooth is not so keen,</A><br>
<A>Because thou art not seen,</A><br>
<A>Although thy breath be rude.</A><br>
<A>Heigh-ho! sing, heigh-ho! unto the green holly:</A><br>
<A>Most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly:</A><br>
<A>Then, heigh-ho, the holly!</A><br>
<A>This life is most jolly.</A><br>
<A>Freeze, freeze, thou bitter sky,</A><br>
<A>That dost not bite so nigh</A><br>
<A>As benefits forgot:</A><br>
<A>Though thou the waters warp,</A><br>
<A>Thy sting is not so sharp</A><br>
<A>As friend remember'd not.</A><br>
<A>Heigh-ho! sing,  & c.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
<blockquote>
<A>If that you were the good Sir Rowland's son,</A><br>
<A>As you have whisper'd faithfully you were,</A><br>
<A>And as mine eye doth his effigies witness</A><br>
<A>Most truly limn'd and living in your face,</A><br>
<A>Be truly welcome hither: I am the duke</A><br>
<A>That loved your father: the residue of your fortune,</A><br>
<A>Go to my cave and tell me. Good old man,</A><br>
<A>Thou art right welcome as thy master is.</A><br>
<A>Support him by the arm. Give me your hand,</A><br>
<A>And let me all your fortunes understand.</A><br>
<p><i>Exeunt</i></p>
</blockquote><p>
<H3>ACT III</h3>
<h3>SCENE I. A room in the palace.</h3>
<p><blockquote>
<i>Enter DUKE FREDERICK, Lords, and OLIVER</i>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Frederick</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Not see him since? Sir, sir, that cannot be:</A><br>
<A>But were I not the better part made mercy,</A><br>
<A>I should not seek an absent argument</A><br>
<A>Of my revenge, thou present. But look to it:</A><br>
<A>Find out thy brother, wheresoe'er he is;</A><br>
<A>Seek him with candle; bring him dead or living</A><br>
<A>Within this twelvemonth, or turn thou no more</A><br>
<A>To seek a living in our territory.</A><br>
<A>Thy lands and all things that thou dost call thine</A><br>
<A>Worth seizure do we seize into our hands,</A><br>
<A>Till thou canst quit thee by thy brothers mouth</A><br>
<A>Of what we think against thee.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
<blockquote>
<A>O that your highness knew my heart in this!</A><br>
<A>I never loved my brother in my life.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Frederick</td>
<blockquote>
<A>More villain thou. Well, push him out of doors;</A><br>
<A>And let my officers of such a nature</A><br>
<A>Make an extent upon his house and lands:</A><br>
<A>Do this expediently and turn him going.</A><br>
<p><i>Exeunt</i></p>
</blockquote>
<h3>SCENE II. The forest.</h3>
<p><blockquote>
<i>Enter ORLANDO, with a paper</i>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Hang there, my verse, in witness of my love:</A><br>
<A>And thou, thrice-crowned queen of night, survey</A><br>
<A>With thy chaste eye, from thy pale sphere above,</A><br>
<A>Thy huntress' name that my full life doth sway.</A><br>
<A>O Rosalind! these trees shall be my books</A><br>
<A>And in their barks my thoughts I'll character;</A><br>
<A>That every eye which in this forest looks</A><br>
<A>Shall see thy virtue witness'd every where.</A><br>
<A>Run, run, Orlando; carve on every tree</A><br>
<A>The fair, the chaste and unexpressive she.</A><br>
<p><i>Exit</i></p>
<p><i>Enter CORIN and TOUCHSTONE</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corin</td>
<blockquote>
<A>And how like you this shepherd's life, Master Touchstone?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Truly, shepherd, in respect of itself, it is a good</A><br>
<A>life, but in respect that it is a shepherd's life,</A><br>
<A>it is naught. In respect that it is solitary, I</A><br>
<A>like it very well; but in respect that it is</A><br>
<A>private, it is a very vile life. Now, in respect it</A><br>
<A>is in the fields, it pleaseth me well; but in</A><br>
<A>respect it is not in the court, it is tedious. As</A><br>
<A>is it a spare life, look you, it fits my humour well;</A><br>
<A>but as there is no more plenty in it, it goes much</A><br>
<A>against my stomach. Hast any philosophy in thee, shepherd?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corin</td>
<blockquote>
<A>No more but that I know the more one sickens the</A><br>
<A>worse at ease he is; and that he that wants money,</A><br>
<A>means and content is without three good friends;</A><br>
<A>that the property of rain is to wet and fire to</A><br>
<A>burn; that good pasture makes fat sheep, and that a</A><br>
<A>great cause of the night is lack of the sun; that</A><br>
<A>he that hath learned no wit by nature nor art may</A><br>
<A>complain of good breeding or comes of a very dull kindred.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Such a one is a natural philosopher. Wast ever in</A><br>
<A>court, shepherd?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corin</td>
<blockquote>
<A>No, truly.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Then thou art damned.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corin</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Nay, I hope.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Truly, thou art damned like an ill-roasted egg, all</A><br>
<A>on one side.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corin</td>
<blockquote>
<A>For not being at court? Your reason.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Why, if thou never wast at court, thou never sawest</A><br>
<A>good manners; if thou never sawest good manners,</A><br>
<A>then thy manners must be wicked; and wickedness is</A><br>
<A>sin, and sin is damnation. Thou art in a parlous</A><br>
<A>state, shepherd.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corin</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Not a whit, Touchstone: those that are good manners</A><br>
<A>at the court are as ridiculous in the country as the</A><br>
<A>behavior of the country is most mockable at the</A><br>
<A>court. You told me you salute not at the court, but</A><br>
<A>you kiss your hands: that courtesy would be</A><br>
<A>uncleanly, if courtiers were shepherds.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Instance, briefly; come, instance.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corin</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Why, we are still handling our ewes, and their</A><br>
<A>fells, you know, are greasy.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Why, do not your courtier's hands sweat? and is not</A><br>
<A>the grease of a mutton as wholesome as the sweat of</A><br>
<A>a man? Shallow, shallow. A better instance, I say; come.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corin</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Besides, our hands are hard.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Your lips will feel them the sooner. Shallow again.</A><br>
<A>A more sounder instance, come.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corin</td>
<blockquote>
<A>And they are often tarred over with the surgery of</A><br>
<A>our sheep: and would you have us kiss tar? The</A><br>
<A>courtier's hands are perfumed with civet.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Most shallow man! thou worms-meat, in respect of a</A><br>
<A>good piece of flesh indeed! Learn of the wise, and</A><br>
<A>perpend: civet is of a baser birth than tar, the</A><br>
<A>very uncleanly flux of a cat. Mend the instance, shepherd.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corin</td>
<blockquote>
<A>You have too courtly a wit for me: I'll rest.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Wilt thou rest damned? God help thee, shallow man!</A><br>
<A>God make incision in thee! thou art raw.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corin</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Sir, I am a true labourer: I earn that I eat, get</A><br>
<A>that I wear, owe no man hate, envy no man's</A><br>
<A>happiness, glad of other men's good, content with my</A><br>
<A>harm, and the greatest of my pride is to see my ewes</A><br>
<A>graze and my lambs suck.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>That is another simple sin in you, to bring the ewes</A><br>
<A>and the rams together and to offer to get your</A><br>
<A>living by the copulation of cattle; to be bawd to a</A><br>
<A>bell-wether, and to betray a she-lamb of a</A><br>
<A>twelvemonth to a crooked-pated, old, cuckoldly ram,</A><br>
<A>out of all reasonable match. If thou beest not</A><br>
<A>damned for this, the devil himself will have no</A><br>
<A>shepherds; I cannot see else how thou shouldst</A><br>
<A>'scape.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corin</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Here comes young Master Ganymede, my new mistress's brother.</A><br>
<p><i>Enter ROSALIND, with a paper, reading</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>     From the east to western Ind,</A><br>
<A>No jewel is like Rosalind.</A><br>
<A>Her worth, being mounted on the wind,</A><br>
<A>Through all the world bears Rosalind.</A><br>
<A>All the pictures fairest lined</A><br>
<A>Are but black to Rosalind.</A><br>
<A>Let no fair be kept in mind</A><br>
<A>But the fair of Rosalind.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I'll rhyme you so eight years together, dinners and</A><br>
<A>suppers and sleeping-hours excepted: it is the</A><br>
<A>right butter-women's rank to market.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Out, fool!</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>For a taste:</A><br>
<A>If a hart do lack a hind,</A><br>
<A>Let him seek out Rosalind.</A><br>
<A>If the cat will after kind,</A><br>
<A>So be sure will Rosalind.</A><br>
<A>Winter garments must be lined,</A><br>
<A>So must slender Rosalind.</A><br>
<A>They that reap must sheaf and bind;</A><br>
<A>Then to cart with Rosalind.</A><br>
<A>Sweetest nut hath sourest rind,</A><br>
<A>Such a nut is Rosalind.</A><br>
<A>He that sweetest rose will find</A><br>
<A>Must find love's prick and Rosalind.</A><br>
<A>This is the very false gallop of verses: why do you</A><br>
<A>infect yourself with them?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Peace, you dull fool! I found them on a tree.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Truly, the tree yields bad fruit.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I'll graff it with you, and then I shall graff it</A><br>
<A>with a medlar: then it will be the earliest fruit</A><br>
<A>i' the country; for you'll be rotten ere you be half</A><br>
<A>ripe, and that's the right virtue of the medlar.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>You have said; but whether wisely or no, let the</A><br>
<A>forest judge.</A><br>
<p><i>Enter CELIA, with a writing</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Peace! Here comes my sister, reading: stand aside.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>[Reads]</A><br>
<A>Why should this a desert be?</A><br>
<A>For it is unpeopled? No:</A><br>
<A>Tongues I'll hang on every tree,</A><br>
<A>That shall civil sayings show:</A><br>
<A>Some, how brief the life of man</A><br>
<A>Runs his erring pilgrimage,</A><br>
<A>That the stretching of a span</A><br>
<A>Buckles in his sum of age;</A><br>
<A>Some, of violated vows</A><br>
<A>'Twixt the souls of friend and friend:</A><br>
<A>But upon the fairest boughs,</A><br>
<A>Or at every sentence end,</A><br>
<A>Will I Rosalinda write,</A><br>
<A>Teaching all that read to know</A><br>
<A>The quintessence of every sprite</A><br>
<A>Heaven would in little show.</A><br>
<A>Therefore Heaven Nature charged</A><br>
<A>That one body should be fill'd</A><br>
<A>With all graces wide-enlarged:</A><br>
<A>Nature presently distill'd</A><br>
<A>Helen's cheek, but not her heart,</A><br>
<A>Cleopatra's majesty,</A><br>
<A>Atalanta's better part,</A><br>
<A>Sad Lucretia's modesty.</A><br>
<A>Thus Rosalind of many parts</A><br>
<A>By heavenly synod was devised,</A><br>
<A>Of many faces, eyes and hearts,</A><br>
<A>To have the touches dearest prized.</A><br>
<A>Heaven would that she these gifts should have,</A><br>
<A>And I to live and die her slave.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>O most gentle pulpiter! what tedious homily of love</A><br>
<A>have you wearied your parishioners withal, and never</A><br>
<A>cried 'Have patience, good people!'</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>How now! back, friends! Shepherd, go off a little.</A><br>
<A>Go with him, sirrah.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Come, shepherd, let us make an honourable retreat;</A><br>
<A>though not with bag and baggage, yet with scrip and scrippage.</A><br>
<p><i>Exeunt CORIN and TOUCHSTONE</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Didst thou hear these verses?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>O, yes, I heard them all, and more too; for some of</A><br>
<A>them had in them more feet than the verses would bear.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>That's no matter: the feet might bear the verses.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Ay, but the feet were lame and could not bear</A><br>
<A>themselves without the verse and therefore stood</A><br>
<A>lamely in the verse.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>But didst thou hear without wondering how thy name</A><br>
<A>should be hanged and carved upon these trees?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I was seven of the nine days out of the wonder</A><br>
<A>before you came; for look here what I found on a</A><br>
<A>palm-tree. I was never so be-rhymed since</A><br>
<A>Pythagoras' time, that I was an Irish rat, which I</A><br>
<A>can hardly remember.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Trow you who hath done this?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Is it a man?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>And a chain, that you once wore, about his neck.</A><br>
<A>Change you colour?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I prithee, who?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>O Lord, Lord! it is a hard matter for friends to</A><br>
<A>meet; but mountains may be removed with earthquakes</A><br>
<A>and so encounter.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Nay, but who is it?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Is it possible?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Nay, I prithee now with most petitionary vehemence,</A><br>
<A>tell me who it is.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>O wonderful, wonderful, and most wonderful</A><br>
<A>wonderful! and yet again wonderful, and after that,</A><br>
<A>out of all hooping!</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Good my complexion! dost thou think, though I am</A><br>
<A>caparisoned like a man, I have a doublet and hose in</A><br>
<A>my disposition? One inch of delay more is a</A><br>
<A>South-sea of discovery; I prithee, tell me who is it</A><br>
<A>quickly, and speak apace. I would thou couldst</A><br>
<A>stammer, that thou mightst pour this concealed man</A><br>
<A>out of thy mouth, as wine comes out of a narrow-</A><br>
<A>mouthed bottle, either too much at once, or none at</A><br>
<A>all. I prithee, take the cork out of thy mouth that</A><br>
<A>may drink thy tidings.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>So you may put a man in your belly.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Is he of God's making? What manner of man? Is his</A><br>
<A>head worth a hat, or his chin worth a beard?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Nay, he hath but a little beard.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Why, God will send more, if the man will be</A><br>
<A>thankful: let me stay the growth of his beard, if</A><br>
<A>thou delay me not the knowledge of his chin.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>It is young Orlando, that tripped up the wrestler's</A><br>
<A>heels and your heart both in an instant.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Nay, but the devil take mocking: speak, sad brow and</A><br>
<A>true maid.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I' faith, coz, 'tis he.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Orlando?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Orlando.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Alas the day! what shall I do with my doublet and</A><br>
<A>hose? What did he when thou sawest him? What said</A><br>
<A>he? How looked he? Wherein went he? What makes</A><br>
<A>him here? Did he ask for me? Where remains he?</A><br>
<A>How parted he with thee? and when shalt thou see</A><br>
<A>him again? Answer me in one word.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>You must borrow me Gargantua's mouth first: 'tis a</A><br>
<A>word too great for any mouth of this age's size. To</A><br>
<A>say ay and no to these particulars is more than to</A><br>
<A>answer in a catechism.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>But doth he know that I am in this forest and in</A><br>
<A>man's apparel? Looks he as freshly as he did the</A><br>
<A>day he wrestled?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>It is as easy to count atomies as to resolve the</A><br>
<A>propositions of a lover; but take a taste of my</A><br>
<A>finding him, and relish it with good observance.</A><br>
<A>I found him under a tree, like a dropped acorn.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>It may well be called Jove's tree, when it drops</A><br>
<A>forth such fruit.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Give me audience, good madam.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Proceed.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>There lay he, stretched along, like a wounded knight.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Though it be pity to see such a sight, it well</A><br>
<A>becomes the ground.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Cry 'holla' to thy tongue, I prithee; it curvets</A><br>
<A>unseasonably. He was furnished like a hunter.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>O, ominous! he comes to kill my heart.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I would sing my song without a burden: thou bringest</A><br>
<A>me out of tune.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Do you not know I am a woman? when I think, I must</A><br>
<A>speak. Sweet, say on.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>You bring me out. Soft! comes he not here?</A><br>
<p><i>Enter ORLANDO and JAQUES</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>'Tis he: slink by, and note him.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I thank you for your company; but, good faith, I had</A><br>
<A>as lief have been myself alone.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>And so had I; but yet, for fashion sake, I thank you</A><br>
<A>too for your society.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>God be wi' you: let's meet as little as we can.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I do desire we may be better strangers.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I pray you, mar no more trees with writing</A><br>
<A>love-songs in their barks.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I pray you, mar no more of my verses with reading</A><br>
<A>them ill-favouredly.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Rosalind is your love's name?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Yes, just.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I do not like her name.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>There was no thought of pleasing you when she was</A><br>
<A>christened.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>What stature is she of?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Just as high as my heart.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>You are full of pretty answers. Have you not been</A><br>
<A>acquainted with goldsmiths' wives, and conned them</A><br>
<A>out of rings?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Not so; but I answer you right painted cloth, from</A><br>
<A>whence you have studied your questions.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>You have a nimble wit: I think 'twas made of</A><br>
<A>Atalanta's heels. Will you sit down with me? and</A><br>
<A>we two will rail against our mistress the world and</A><br>
<A>all our misery.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I will chide no breather in the world but myself,</A><br>
<A>against whom I know most faults.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>The worst fault you have is to be in love.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>'Tis a fault I will not change for your best virtue.</A><br>
<A>I am weary of you.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>By my troth, I was seeking for a fool when I found</A><br>
<A>you.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>He is drowned in the brook: look but in, and you</A><br>
<A>shall see him.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>There I shall see mine own figure.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Which I take to be either a fool or a cipher.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I'll tarry no longer with you: farewell, good</A><br>
<A>Signior Love.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I am glad of your departure: adieu, good Monsieur</A><br>
<A>Melancholy.</A><br>
<p><i>Exit JAQUES</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>[Aside to CELIA]  I will speak to him, like a saucy</A><br>
<A>lackey and under that habit play the knave with him.</A><br>
<A>Do you hear, forester?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Very well: what would you?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I pray you, what is't o'clock?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>You should ask me what time o' day: there's no clock</A><br>
<A>in the forest.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Then there is no true lover in the forest; else</A><br>
<A>sighing every minute and groaning every hour would</A><br>
<A>detect the lazy foot of Time as well as a clock.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>And why not the swift foot of Time? had not that</A><br>
<A>been as proper?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>By no means, sir: Time travels in divers paces with</A><br>
<A>divers persons. I'll tell you who Time ambles</A><br>
<A>withal, who Time trots withal, who Time gallops</A><br>
<A>withal and who he stands still withal.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I prithee, who doth he trot withal?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Marry, he trots hard with a young maid between the</A><br>
<A>contract of her marriage and the day it is</A><br>
<A>solemnized: if the interim be but a se'nnight,</A><br>
<A>Time's pace is so hard that it seems the length of</A><br>
<A>seven year.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Who ambles Time withal?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>With a priest that lacks Latin and a rich man that</A><br>
<A>hath not the gout, for the one sleeps easily because</A><br>
<A>he cannot study, and the other lives merrily because</A><br>
<A>he feels no pain, the one lacking the burden of lean</A><br>
<A>and wasteful learning, the other knowing no burden</A><br>
<A>of heavy tedious penury; these Time ambles withal.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Who doth he gallop withal?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>With a thief to the gallows, for though he go as</A><br>
<A>softly as foot can fall, he thinks himself too soon there.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Who stays it still withal?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>With lawyers in the vacation, for they sleep between</A><br>
<A>term and term and then they perceive not how Time moves.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Where dwell you, pretty youth?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>With this shepherdess, my sister; here in the</A><br>
<A>skirts of the forest, like fringe upon a petticoat.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Are you native of this place?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>As the cony that you see dwell where she is kindled.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Your accent is something finer than you could</A><br>
<A>purchase in so removed a dwelling.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I have been told so of many: but indeed an old</A><br>
<A>religious uncle of mine taught me to speak, who was</A><br>
<A>in his youth an inland man; one that knew courtship</A><br>
<A>too well, for there he fell in love. I have heard</A><br>
<A>him read many lectures against it, and I thank God</A><br>
<A>I am not a woman, to be touched with so many</A><br>
<A>giddy offences as he hath generally taxed their</A><br>
<A>whole sex withal.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Can you remember any of the principal evils that he</A><br>
<A>laid to the charge of women?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>There were none principal; they were all like one</A><br>
<A>another as half-pence are, every one fault seeming</A><br>
<A>monstrous till his fellow fault came to match it.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I prithee, recount some of them.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>No, I will not cast away my physic but on those that</A><br>
<A>are sick. There is a man haunts the forest, that</A><br>
<A>abuses our young plants with carving 'Rosalind' on</A><br>
<A>their barks; hangs odes upon hawthorns and elegies</A><br>
<A>on brambles, all, forsooth, deifying the name of</A><br>
<A>Rosalind: if I could meet that fancy-monger I would</A><br>
<A>give him some good counsel, for he seems to have the</A><br>
<A>quotidian of love upon him.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I am he that is so love-shaked: I pray you tell me</A><br>
<A>your remedy.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>There is none of my uncle's marks upon you: he</A><br>
<A>taught me how to know a man in love; in which cage</A><br>
<A>of rushes I am sure you are not prisoner.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>What were his marks?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>A lean cheek, which you have not, a blue eye and</A><br>
<A>sunken, which you have not, an unquestionable</A><br>
<A>spirit, which you have not, a beard neglected,</A><br>
<A>which you have not; but I pardon you for that, for</A><br>
<A>simply your having in beard is a younger brother's</A><br>
<A>revenue: then your hose should be ungartered, your</A><br>
<A>bonnet unbanded, your sleeve unbuttoned, your shoe</A><br>
<A>untied and every thing about you demonstrating a</A><br>
<A>careless desolation; but you are no such man; you</A><br>
<A>are rather point-device in your accoutrements as</A><br>
<A>loving yourself than seeming the lover of any other.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Fair youth, I would I could make thee believe I love.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Me believe it! you may as soon make her that you</A><br>
<A>love believe it; which, I warrant, she is apter to</A><br>
<A>do than to confess she does: that is one of the</A><br>
<A>points in the which women still give the lie to</A><br>
<A>their consciences. But, in good sooth, are you he</A><br>
<A>that hangs the verses on the trees, wherein Rosalind</A><br>
<A>is so admired?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I swear to thee, youth, by the white hand of</A><br>
<A>Rosalind, I am that he, that unfortunate he.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>But are you so much in love as your rhymes speak?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Neither rhyme nor reason can express how much.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Love is merely a madness, and, I tell you, deserves</A><br>
<A>as well a dark house and a whip as madmen do: and</A><br>
<A>the reason why they are not so punished and cured</A><br>
<A>is, that the lunacy is so ordinary that the whippers</A><br>
<A>are in love too. Yet I profess curing it by counsel.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Did you ever cure any so?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Yes, one, and in this manner. He was to imagine me</A><br>
<A>his love, his mistress; and I set him every day to</A><br>
<A>woo me: at which time would I, being but a moonish</A><br>
<A>youth, grieve, be effeminate, changeable, longing</A><br>
<A>and liking, proud, fantastical, apish, shallow,</A><br>
<A>inconstant, full of tears, full of smiles, for every</A><br>
<A>passion something and for no passion truly any</A><br>
<A>thing, as boys and women are for the most part</A><br>
<A>cattle of this colour; would now like him, now loathe</A><br>
<A>him; then entertain him, then forswear him; now weep</A><br>
<A>for him, then spit at him; that I drave my suitor</A><br>
<A>from his mad humour of love to a living humour of</A><br>
<A>madness; which was, to forswear the full stream of</A><br>
<A>the world, and to live in a nook merely monastic.</A><br>
<A>And thus I cured him; and this way will I take upon</A><br>
<A>me to wash your liver as clean as a sound sheep's</A><br>
<A>heart, that there shall not be one spot of love in't.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I would not be cured, youth.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I would cure you, if you would but call me Rosalind</A><br>
<A>and come every day to my cote and woo me.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Now, by the faith of my love, I will: tell me</A><br>
<A>where it is.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Go with me to it and I'll show it you and by the way</A><br>
<A>you shall tell me where in the forest you live.</A><br>
<A>Will you go?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>With all my heart, good youth.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Nay you must call me Rosalind. Come, sister, will you go?</A><br>
<p><i>Exeunt</i></p>
</blockquote>
<h3>SCENE III. The forest.</h3>
<p><blockquote>
<i>Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY; JAQUES behind</i>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Come apace, good Audrey: I will fetch up your</A><br>
<A>goats, Audrey. And how, Audrey? am I the man yet?</A><br>
<A>doth my simple feature content you?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audrey</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Your features! Lord warrant us! what features!</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I am here with thee and thy goats, as the most</A><br>
<A>capricious poet, honest Ovid, was among the Goths.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>[Aside]  O knowledge ill-inhabited, worse than Jove</A><br>
<A>in a thatched house!</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>When a man's verses cannot be understood, nor a</A><br>
<A>man's good wit seconded with the forward child</A><br>
<A>Understanding, it strikes a man more dead than a</A><br>
<A>great reckoning in a little room. Truly, I would</A><br>
<A>the gods had made thee poetical.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audrey</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I do not know what 'poetical' is: is it honest in</A><br>
<A>deed and word? is it a true thing?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>No, truly; for the truest poetry is the most</A><br>
<A>feigning; and lovers are given to poetry, and what</A><br>
<A>they swear in poetry may be said as lovers they do feign.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audrey</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Do you wish then that the gods had made me poetical?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I do, truly; for thou swearest to me thou art</A><br>
<A>honest: now, if thou wert a poet, I might have some</A><br>
<A>hope thou didst feign.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audrey</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Would you not have me honest?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>No, truly, unless thou wert hard-favoured; for</A><br>
<A>honesty coupled to beauty is to have honey a sauce to sugar.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>[Aside]  A material fool!</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audrey</td>
<blockquote>
<A> Well, I am not fair; and therefore I pray the gods</A><br>
<A>make me honest.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Truly, and to cast away honesty upon a foul slut</A><br>
<A>were to put good meat into an unclean dish.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audrey</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I am not a slut, though I thank the gods I am foul.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Well, praised be the gods for thy foulness!</A><br>
<A>sluttishness may come hereafter. But be it as it may</A><br>
<A>be, I will marry thee, and to that end I have been</A><br>
<A>with Sir Oliver Martext, the vicar of the next</A><br>
<A>village, who hath promised to meet me in this place</A><br>
<A>of the forest and to couple us.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>[Aside]  I would fain see this meeting.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audrey</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Well, the gods give us joy!</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Amen. A man may, if he were of a fearful heart,</A><br>
<A>stagger in this attempt; for here we have no temple</A><br>
<A>but the wood, no assembly but horn-beasts. But what</A><br>
<A>though? C ourage! As horns are odious, they are</A><br>
<A>necessary. It is said, 'many a man knows no end of</A><br>
<A>his goods:' right; many a man has good horns, and</A><br>
<A>knows no end of them. Well, that is the dowry of</A><br>
<A>his wife; 'tis none of his own getting. Horns?</A><br>
<A>Even so. Poor men alone? No, no; the noblest deer</A><br>
<A>hath them as huge as the rascal. Is the single man</A><br>
<A>therefore blessed? No: as a walled town is more</A><br>
<A>worthier than a village, so is the forehead of a</A><br>
<A>married man more honourable than the bare brow of a</A><br>
<A>bachelor; and by how much defence is better than no</A><br>
<A>skill, by so much is a horn more precious than to</A><br>
<A>want. Here comes Sir Oliver.</A><br>
<p><i>Enter SIR OLIVER MARTEXT</i></p>
<A>Sir Oliver Martext, you are well met: will you</A><br>
<A>dispatch us here under this tree, or shall we go</A><br>
<A>with you to your chapel?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Oliver martext</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Is there none here to give the woman?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I will not take her on gift of any man.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Oliver martext</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Truly, she must be given, or the marriage is not lawful.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>[Advancing]</A><br>
<A>Proceed, proceed	I'll give her.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Good even, good Master What-ye-call't: how do you,</A><br>
<A>sir? You are very well met: God 'ild you for your</A><br>
<A>last company: I am very glad to see you: even a</A><br>
<A>toy in hand here, sir: nay, pray be covered.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Will you be married, motley?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>As the ox hath his bow, sir, the horse his curb and</A><br>
<A>the falcon her bells, so man hath his desires; and</A><br>
<A>as pigeons bill, so wedlock would be nibbling.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>And will you, being a man of your breeding, be</A><br>
<A>married under a bush like a beggar? Get you to</A><br>
<A>church, and have a good priest that can tell you</A><br>
<A>what marriage is: this fellow will but join you</A><br>
<A>together as they join wainscot; then one of you will</A><br>
<A>prove a shrunk panel and, like green timber, warp, warp.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>[Aside]  I am not in the mind but I were better to be</A><br>
<A>married of him than of another: for he is not like</A><br>
<A>to marry me well; and not being well married, it</A><br>
<A>will be a good excuse for me hereafter to leave my wife.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Go thou with me, and let me counsel thee.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>'Come, sweet Audrey:</A><br>
<A>We must be married, or we must live in bawdry.</A><br>
<A>Farewell, good Master Oliver: not,--</A><br>
<A>O sweet Oliver,</A><br>
<A>O brave Oliver,</A><br>
<A>Leave me not behind thee: but,--</A><br>
<A>Wind away,</A><br>
<A>Begone, I say,</A><br>
<A>I will not to wedding with thee.</A><br>
<p><i>Exeunt JAQUES, TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Oliver martext</td>
<blockquote>
<A>'Tis no matter: ne'er a fantastical knave of them</A><br>
<A>all shall flout me out of my calling.</A><br>
<p><i>Exit</i></p>
</blockquote>
<h3>SCENE IV. The forest.</h3>
<p><blockquote>
<i>Enter ROSALIND and CELIA</i>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Never talk to me; I will weep.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Do, I prithee; but yet have the grace to consider</A><br>
<A>that tears do not become a man.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>But have I not cause to weep?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>As good cause as one would desire; therefore weep.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>His very hair is of the dissembling colour.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Something browner than Judas's marry, his kisses are</A><br>
<A>Judas's own children.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I' faith, his hair is of a good colour.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>An excellent colour: your chestnut was ever the only colour.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>And his kissing is as full of sanctity as the touch</A><br>
<A>of holy bread.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>He hath bought a pair of cast lips of Diana: a nun</A><br>
<A>of winter's sisterhood kisses not more religiously;</A><br>
<A>the very ice of chastity is in them.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>But why did he swear he would come this morning, and</A><br>
<A>comes not?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Nay, certainly, there is no truth in him.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Do you think so?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Yes; I think he is not a pick-purse nor a</A><br>
<A>horse-stealer, but for his verity in love, I do</A><br>
<A>think him as concave as a covered goblet or a</A><br>
<A>worm-eaten nut.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Not true in love?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Yes, when he is in; but I think he is not in.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>You have heard him swear downright he was.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>'Was' is not 'is:' besides, the oath of a lover is</A><br>
<A>no stronger than the word of a tapster; they are</A><br>
<A>both the confirmer of false reckonings. He attends</A><br>
<A>here in the forest on the duke your father.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I met the duke yesterday and had much question with</A><br>
<A>him: he asked me of what parentage I was; I told</A><br>
<A>him, of as good as he; so he laughed and let me go.</A><br>
<A>But what talk we of fathers, when there is such a</A><br>
<A>man as Orlando?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>O, that's a brave man! he writes brave verses,</A><br>
<A>speaks brave words, swears brave oaths and breaks</A><br>
<A>them bravely, quite traverse, athwart the heart of</A><br>
<A>his lover; as a puisny tilter, that spurs his horse</A><br>
<A>but on one side, breaks his staff like a noble</A><br>
<A>goose: but all's brave that youth mounts and folly</A><br>
<A>guides. Who comes here?</A><br>
<p><i>Enter CORIN</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corin</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Mistress and master, you have oft inquired</A><br>
<A>After the shepherd that complain'd of love,</A><br>
<A>Who you saw sitting by me on the turf,</A><br>
<A>Praising the proud disdainful shepherdess</A><br>
<A>That was his mistress.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Well, and what of him?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corin</td>
<blockquote>
<A>If you will see a pageant truly play'd,</A><br>
<A>Between the pale complexion of true love</A><br>
<A>And the red glow of scorn and proud disdain,</A><br>
<A>Go hence a little and I shall conduct you,</A><br>
<A>If you will mark it.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>O, come, let us remove:</A><br>
<A>The sight of lovers feedeth those in love.</A><br>
<A>Bring us to this sight, and you shall say</A><br>
<A>I'll prove a busy actor in their play.</A><br>
<p><i>Exeunt</i></p>
</blockquote>
<h3>SCENE V. Another part of the forest.</h3>
<p><blockquote>
<i>Enter SILVIUS and PHEBE</i>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Sweet Phebe, do not scorn me; do not, Phebe;</A><br>
<A>Say that you love me not, but say not so</A><br>
<A>In bitterness. The common executioner,</A><br>
<A>Whose heart the accustom'd sight of death makes hard,</A><br>
<A>Falls not the axe upon the humbled neck</A><br>
<A>But first begs pardon: will you sterner be</A><br>
<A>Than he that dies and lives by bloody drops?</A><br>
<p><i>Enter ROSALIND, CELIA, and CORIN, behind</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phebe</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I would not be thy executioner:</A><br>
<A>I fly thee, for I would not injure thee.</A><br>
<A>Thou tell'st me there is murder in mine eye:</A><br>
<A>'Tis pretty, sure, and very probable,</A><br>
<A>That eyes, that are the frail'st and softest things,</A><br>
<A>Who shut their coward gates on atomies,</A><br>
<A>Should be call'd tyrants, butchers, murderers!</A><br>
<A>Now I do frown on thee with all my heart;</A><br>
<A>And if mine eyes can wound, now let them kill thee:</A><br>
<A>Now counterfeit to swoon; why now fall down;</A><br>
<A>Or if thou canst not, O, for shame, for shame,</A><br>
<A>Lie not, to say mine eyes are murderers!</A><br>
<A>Now show the wound mine eye hath made in thee:</A><br>
<A>Scratch thee but with a pin, and there remains</A><br>
<A>Some scar of it; lean but upon a rush,</A><br>
<A>The cicatrice and capable impressure</A><br>
<A>Thy palm some moment keeps; but now mine eyes,</A><br>
<A>Which I have darted at thee, hurt thee not,</A><br>
<A>Nor, I am sure, there is no force in eyes</A><br>
<A>That can do hurt.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</td>
<blockquote>
<A>                  O dear Phebe,</A><br>
<A>If ever,--as that ever may be near,--</A><br>
<A>You meet in some fresh cheek the power of fancy,</A><br>
<A>Then shall you know the wounds invisible</A><br>
<A>That love's keen arrows make.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phebe</td>
<blockquote>
<A>But till that time</A><br>
<A>Come not thou near me: and when that time comes,</A><br>
<A>Afflict me with thy mocks, pity me not;</A><br>
<A>As till that time I shall not pity thee.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>And why, I pray you? Who might be your mother,</A><br>
<A>That you insult, exult, and all at once,</A><br>
<A>Over the wretched? What though you have no beauty,--</A><br>
<A>As, by my faith, I see no more in you</A><br>
<A>Than without candle may go dark to bed--</A><br>
<A>Must you be therefore proud and pitiless?</A><br>
<A>Why, what means this? Why do you look on me?</A><br>
<A>I see no more in you than in the ordinary</A><br>
<A>Of nature's sale-work. 'Od's my little life,</A><br>
<A>I think she means to tangle my eyes too!</A><br>
<A>No, faith, proud mistress, hope not after it:</A><br>
<A>'Tis not your inky brows, your black silk hair,</A><br>
<A>Your bugle eyeballs, nor your cheek of cream,</A><br>
<A>That can entame my spirits to your worship.</A><br>
<A>You foolish shepherd, wherefore do you follow her,</A><br>
<A>Like foggy south puffing with wind and rain?</A><br>
<A>You are a thousand times a properer man</A><br>
<A>Than she a woman: 'tis such fools as you</A><br>
<A>That makes the world full of ill-favour'd children:</A><br>
<A>'Tis not her glass, but you, that flatters her;</A><br>
<A>And out of you she sees herself more proper</A><br>
<A>Than any of her lineaments can show her.</A><br>
<A>But, mistress, know yourself: down on your knees,</A><br>
<A>And thank heaven, fasting, for a good man's love:</A><br>
<A>For I must tell you friendly in your ear,</A><br>
<A>Sell when you can: you are not for all markets:</A><br>
<A>Cry the man mercy; love him; take his offer:</A><br>
<A>Foul is most foul, being foul to be a scoffer.</A><br>
<A>So take her to thee, shepherd: fare you well.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phebe</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Sweet youth, I pray you, chide a year together:</A><br>
<A>I had rather hear you chide than this man woo.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>He's fallen in love with your foulness and she'll</A><br>
<A>fall in love with my anger. If it be so, as fast as</A><br>
<A>she answers thee with frowning looks, I'll sauce her</A><br>
<A>with bitter words. Why look you so upon me?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phebe</td>
<blockquote>
<A>For no ill will I bear you.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I pray you, do not fall in love with me,</A><br>
<A>For I am falser than vows made in wine:</A><br>
<A>Besides, I like you not. If you will know my house,</A><br>
<A>'Tis at the tuft of olives here hard by.</A><br>
<A>Will you go, sister? Shepherd, ply her hard.</A><br>
<A>Come, sister. Shepherdess, look on him better,</A><br>
<A>And be not proud: though all the world could see,</A><br>
<A>None could be so abused in sight as he.</A><br>
<A>Come, to our flock.</A><br>
<p><i>Exeunt ROSALIND, CELIA and CORIN</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phebe</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Dead Shepherd, now I find thy saw of might,</A><br>
<A>'Who ever loved that loved not at first sight?'</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Sweet Phebe,--</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phebe</td>
<blockquote>
<A>                  Ha, what say'st thou, Silvius?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Sweet Phebe, pity me.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phebe</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Why, I am sorry for thee, gentle Silvius.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Wherever sorrow is, relief would be:</A><br>
<A>If you do sorrow at my grief in love,</A><br>
<A>By giving love your sorrow and my grief</A><br>
<A>Were both extermined.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phebe</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Thou hast my love: is not that neighbourly?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I would have you.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phebe</td>
<blockquote>
<A>                  Why, that were covetousness.</A><br>
<A>Silvius, the time was that I hated thee,</A><br>
<A>And yet it is not that I bear thee love;</A><br>
<A>But since that thou canst talk of love so well,</A><br>
<A>Thy company, which erst was irksome to me,</A><br>
<A>I will endure, and I'll employ thee too:</A><br>
<A>But do not look for further recompense</A><br>
<A>Than thine own gladness that thou art employ'd.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</td>
<blockquote>
<A>So holy and so perfect is my love,</A><br>
<A>And I in such a poverty of grace,</A><br>
<A>That I shall think it a most plenteous crop</A><br>
<A>To glean the broken ears after the man</A><br>
<A>That the main harvest reaps: loose now and then</A><br>
<A>A scatter'd smile, and that I'll live upon.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phebe</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Know'st now the youth that spoke to me erewhile?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Not very well, but I have met him oft;</A><br>
<A>And he hath bought the cottage and the bounds</A><br>
<A>That the old carlot once was master of.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phebe</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Think not I love him, though I ask for him:</A><br>
<A>'Tis but a peevish boy; yet he talks well;</A><br>
<A>But what care I for words? yet words do well</A><br>
<A>When he that speaks them pleases those that hear.</A><br>
<A>It is a pretty youth: not very pretty:</A><br>
<A>But, sure, he's proud, and yet his pride becomes him:</A><br>
<A>He'll make a proper man: the best thing in him</A><br>
<A>Is his complexion; and faster than his tongue</A><br>
<A>Did make offence his eye did heal it up.</A><br>
<A>He is not very tall; yet for his years he's tall:</A><br>
<A>His leg is but so so; and yet 'tis well:</A><br>
<A>There was a pretty redness in his lip,</A><br>
<A>A little riper and more lusty red</A><br>
<A>Than that mix'd in his cheek; 'twas just the difference</A><br>
<A>Between the constant red and mingled damask.</A><br>
<A>There be some women, Silvius, had they mark'd him</A><br>
<A>In parcels as I did, would have gone near</A><br>
<A>To fall in love with him; but, for my part,</A><br>
<A>I love him not nor hate him not; and yet</A><br>
<A>I have more cause to hate him than to love him:</A><br>
<A>For what had he to do to chide at me?</A><br>
<A>He said mine eyes were black and my hair black:</A><br>
<A>And, now I am remember'd, scorn'd at me:</A><br>
<A>I marvel why I answer'd not again:</A><br>
<A>But that's all one; omittance is no quittance.</A><br>
<A>I'll write to him a very taunting letter,</A><br>
<A>And thou shalt bear it: wilt thou, Silvius?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Phebe, with all my heart.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phebe</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I'll write it straight;</A><br>
<A>The matter's in my head and in my heart:</A><br>
<A>I will be bitter with him and passing short.</A><br>
<A>Go with me, Silvius.</A><br>
<p><i>Exeunt</i></p>
</blockquote><p>
<H3>ACT IV</h3>
<h3>SCENE I. The forest.</h3>
<p><blockquote>
<i>Enter ROSALIND, CELIA, and JAQUES</i>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I prithee, pretty youth, let me be better acquainted</A><br>
<A>with thee.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>They say you are a melancholy fellow.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I am so; I do love it better than laughing.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Those that are in extremity of either are abominable</A><br>
<A>fellows and betray themselves to every modern</A><br>
<A>censure worse than drunkards.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Why, 'tis good to be sad and say nothing.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Why then, 'tis good to be a post.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I have neither the scholar's melancholy, which is</A><br>
<A>emulation, nor the musician's, which is fantastical,</A><br>
<A>nor the courtier's, which is proud, nor the</A><br>
<A>soldier's, which is ambitious, nor the lawyer's,</A><br>
<A>which is politic, nor the lady's, which is nice, nor</A><br>
<A>the lover's, which is all these: but it is a</A><br>
<A>melancholy of mine own, compounded of many simples,</A><br>
<A>extracted from many objects, and indeed the sundry's</A><br>
<A>contemplation of my travels, in which my often</A><br>
<A>rumination wraps me m a most humorous sadness.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>A traveller! By my faith, you have great reason to</A><br>
<A>be sad: I fear you have sold your own lands to see</A><br>
<A>other men's; then, to have seen much and to have</A><br>
<A>nothing, is to have rich eyes and poor hands.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Yes, I have gained my experience.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>And your experience makes you sad: I had rather have</A><br>
<A>a fool to make me merry than experience to make me</A><br>
<A>sad; and to travel for it too!</A><br>
<p><i>Enter ORLANDO</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Good day and happiness, dear Rosalind!</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Nay, then, God be wi' you, an you talk in blank verse.</A><br>
<p><i>Exit</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Farewell, Monsieur Traveller: look you lisp and</A><br>
<A>wear strange suits, disable all the benefits of your</A><br>
<A>own country, be out of love with your nativity and</A><br>
<A>almost chide God for making you that countenance you</A><br>
<A>are, or I will scarce think you have swam in a</A><br>
<A>gondola. Why, how now, Orlando! where have you been</A><br>
<A>all this while? You a lover! An you serve me such</A><br>
<A>another trick, never come in my sight more.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>My fair Rosalind, I come within an hour of my promise.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Break an hour's promise in love! He that will</A><br>
<A>divide a minute into a thousand parts and break but</A><br>
<A>a part of the thousandth part of a minute in the</A><br>
<A>affairs of love, it may be said of him that Cupid</A><br>
<A>hath clapped him o' the shoulder, but I'll warrant</A><br>
<A>him heart-whole.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Pardon me, dear Rosalind.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Nay, an you be so tardy, come no more in my sight: I</A><br>
<A>had as lief be wooed of a snail.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Of a snail?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Ay, of a snail; for though he comes slowly, he</A><br>
<A>carries his house on his head; a better jointure,</A><br>
<A>I think, than you make a woman: besides he brings</A><br>
<A>his destiny with him.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>What's that?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Why, horns, which such as you are fain to be</A><br>
<A>beholding to your wives for: but he comes armed in</A><br>
<A>his fortune and prevents the slander of his wife.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Virtue is no horn-maker; and my Rosalind is virtuous.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>And I am your Rosalind.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>It pleases him to call you so; but he hath a</A><br>
<A>Rosalind of a better leer than you.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Come, woo me, woo me, for now I am in a holiday</A><br>
<A>humour and like enough to consent. What would you</A><br>
<A>say to me now, an I were your very very Rosalind?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I would kiss before I spoke.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Nay, you were better speak first, and when you were</A><br>
<A>gravelled for lack of matter, you might take</A><br>
<A>occasion to kiss. Very good orators, when they are</A><br>
<A>out, they will spit; and for lovers lacking--God</A><br>
<A>warn us!--matter, the cleanliest shift is to kiss.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>How if the kiss be denied?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Then she puts you to entreaty, and there begins new matter.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Who could be out, being before his beloved mistress?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Marry, that should you, if I were your mistress, or</A><br>
<A>I should think my honesty ranker than my wit.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>What, of my suit?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Not out of your apparel, and yet out of your suit.</A><br>
<A>Am not I your Rosalind?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I take some joy to say you are, because I would be</A><br>
<A>talking of her.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Well in her person I say I will not have you.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Then in mine own person I die.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>No, faith, die by attorney. The poor world is</A><br>
<A>almost six thousand years old, and in all this time</A><br>
<A>there was not any man died in his own person,</A><br>
<A>videlicit, in a love-cause. Troilus had his brains</A><br>
<A>dashed out with a Grecian club; yet he did what he</A><br>
<A>could to die before, and he is one of the patterns</A><br>
<A>of love. Leander, he would have lived many a fair</A><br>
<A>year, though Hero had turned nun, if it had not been</A><br>
<A>for a hot midsummer night; for, good youth, he went</A><br>
<A>but forth to wash him in the Hellespont and being</A><br>
<A>taken with the cramp was drowned and the foolish</A><br>
<A>coroners of that age found it was 'Hero of Sestos.'</A><br>
<A>But these are all lies: men have died from time to</A><br>
<A>time and worms have eaten them, but not for love.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I would not have my right Rosalind of this mind,</A><br>
<A>for, I protest, her frown might kill me.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>By this hand, it will not kill a fly. But come, now</A><br>
<A>I will be your Rosalind in a more coming-on</A><br>
<A>disposition, and ask me what you will. I will grant</A><br>
<A>it.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Then love me, Rosalind.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Yes, faith, will I, Fridays and Saturdays and all.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>And wilt thou have me?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Ay, and twenty such.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>What sayest thou?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Are you not good?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I hope so.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Why then, can one desire too much of a good thing?</A><br>
<A>Come, sister, you shall be the priest and marry us.</A><br>
<A>Give me your hand, Orlando. What do you say, sister?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Pray thee, marry us.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I cannot say the words.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>You must begin, 'Will you, Orlando--'</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Go to. Will you, Orlando, have to wife this Rosalind?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I will.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Ay, but when?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Why now; as fast as she can marry us.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Then you must say 'I take thee, Rosalind, for wife.'</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I take thee, Rosalind, for wife.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I might ask you for your commission; but I do take</A><br>
<A>thee, Orlando, for my husband: there's a girl goes</A><br>
<A>before the priest; and certainly a woman's thought</A><br>
<A>runs before her actions.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>So do all thoughts; they are winged.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Now tell me how long you would have her after you</A><br>
<A>have possessed her.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>For ever and a day.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Say 'a day,' without the 'ever.' No, no, Orlando;</A><br>
<A>men are April when they woo, December when they wed:</A><br>
<A>maids are May when they are maids, but the sky</A><br>
<A>changes when they are wives. I will be more jealous</A><br>
<A>of thee than a Barbary cock-pigeon over his hen,</A><br>
<A>more clamorous than a parrot against rain, more</A><br>
<A>new-fangled than an ape, more giddy in my desires</A><br>
<A>than a monkey: I will weep for nothing, like Diana</A><br>
<A>in the fountain, and I will do that when you are</A><br>
<A>disposed to be merry; I will laugh like a hyen, and</A><br>
<A>that when thou art inclined to sleep.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>But will my Rosalind do so?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>By my life, she will do as I do.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>O, but she is wise.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Or else she could not have the wit to do this: the</A><br>
<A>wiser, the waywarder: make the doors upon a woman's</A><br>
<A>wit and it will out at the casement; shut that and</A><br>
<A>'twill out at the key-hole; stop that, 'twill fly</A><br>
<A>with the smoke out at the chimney.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>A man that had a wife with such a wit, he might say</A><br>
<A>'Wit, whither wilt?'</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Nay, you might keep that cheque for it till you met</A><br>
<A>your wife's wit going to your neighbour's bed.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>And what wit could wit have to excuse that?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Marry, to say she came to seek you there. You shall</A><br>
<A>never take her without her answer, unless you take</A><br>
<A>her without her tongue. O, that woman that cannot</A><br>
<A>make her fault her husband's occasion, let her</A><br>
<A>never nurse her child herself, for she will breed</A><br>
<A>it like a fool!</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>For these two hours, Rosalind, I will leave thee.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Alas! dear love, I cannot lack thee two hours.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I must attend the duke at dinner: by two o'clock I</A><br>
<A>will be with thee again.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Ay, go your ways, go your ways; I knew what you</A><br>
<A>would prove: my friends told me as much, and I</A><br>
<A>thought no less: that flattering tongue of yours</A><br>
<A>won me: 'tis but one cast away, and so, come,</A><br>
<A>death! Two o'clock is your hour?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Ay, sweet Rosalind.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>By my troth, and in good earnest, and so God mend</A><br>
<A>me, and by all pretty oaths that are not dangerous,</A><br>
<A>if you break one jot of your promise or come one</A><br>
<A>minute behind your hour, I will think you the most</A><br>
<A>pathetical break-promise and the most hollow lover</A><br>
<A>and the most unworthy of her you call Rosalind that</A><br>
<A>may be chosen out of the gross band of the</A><br>
<A>unfaithful: therefore beware my censure and keep</A><br>
<A>your promise.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>With no less religion than if thou wert indeed my</A><br>
<A>Rosalind: so adieu.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Well, Time is the old justice that examines all such</A><br>
<A>offenders, and let Time try: adieu.</A><br>
<p><i>Exit ORLANDO</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>You have simply misused our sex in your love-prate:</A><br>
<A>we must have your doublet and hose plucked over your</A><br>
<A>head, and show the world what the bird hath done to</A><br>
<A>her own nest.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>O coz, coz, coz, my pretty little coz, that thou</A><br>
<A>didst know how many fathom deep I am in love! But</A><br>
<A>it cannot be sounded: my affection hath an unknown</A><br>
<A>bottom, like the bay of Portugal.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Or rather, bottomless, that as fast as you pour</A><br>
<A>affection in, it runs out.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>No, that same wicked bastard of Venus that was begot</A><br>
<A>of thought, conceived of spleen and born of madness,</A><br>
<A>that blind rascally boy that abuses every one's eyes</A><br>
<A>because his own are out, let him be judge how deep I</A><br>
<A>am in love. I'll tell thee, Aliena, I cannot be out</A><br>
<A>of the sight of Orlando: I'll go find a shadow and</A><br>
<A>sigh till he come.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>And I'll sleep.</A><br>
<p><i>Exeunt</i></p>
</blockquote>
<h3>SCENE II. The forest.</h3>
<p><blockquote>
<i>Enter JAQUES, Lords, and Foresters</i>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Which is he that killed the deer?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">A Lord</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Sir, it was I.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Let's present him to the duke, like a Roman</A><br>
<A>conqueror; and it would do well to set the deer's</A><br>
<A>horns upon his head, for a branch of victory. Have</A><br>
<A>you no song, forester, for this purpose?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Forester</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Yes, sir.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Sing it: 'tis no matter how it be in tune, so it</A><br>
<A>make noise enough.</A><br>
<A>SONG.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Forester</td>
<blockquote>
<A>What shall he have that kill'd the deer?</A><br>
<A>His leather skin and horns to wear.</A><br>
<A>Then sing him home;</A><br>
<p><i>The rest shall bear this burden</i></p>
<A>Take thou no scorn to wear the horn;</A><br>
<A>It was a crest ere thou wast born:</A><br>
<A>Thy father's father wore it,</A><br>
<A>And thy father bore it:</A><br>
<A>The horn, the horn, the lusty horn</A><br>
<A>Is not a thing to laugh to scorn.</A><br>
<p><i>Exeunt</i></p>
</blockquote>
<h3>SCENE III. The forest.</h3>
<p><blockquote>
<i>Enter ROSALIND and CELIA</i>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>How say you now? Is it not past two o'clock? and</A><br>
<A>here much Orlando!</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I warrant you, with pure love and troubled brain, he</A><br>
<A>hath ta'en his bow and arrows and is gone forth to</A><br>
<A>sleep. Look, who comes here.</A><br>
<p><i>Enter SILVIUS</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</td>
<blockquote>
<A>My errand is to you, fair youth;</A><br>
<A>My gentle Phebe bid me give you this:</A><br>
<A>I know not the contents; but, as I guess</A><br>
<A>By the stern brow and waspish action</A><br>
<A>Which she did use as she was writing of it,</A><br>
<A>It bears an angry tenor: pardon me:</A><br>
<A>I am but as a guiltless messenger.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Patience herself would startle at this letter</A><br>
<A>And play the swaggerer; bear this, bear all:</A><br>
<A>She says I am not fair, that I lack manners;</A><br>
<A>She calls me proud, and that she could not love me,</A><br>
<A>Were man as rare as phoenix. 'Od's my will!</A><br>
<A>Her love is not the hare that I do hunt:</A><br>
<A>Why writes she so to me? Well, shepherd, well,</A><br>
<A>This is a letter of your own device.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</td>
<blockquote>
<A>No, I protest, I know not the contents:</A><br>
<A>Phebe did write it.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Come, come, you are a fool</A><br>
<A>And turn'd into the extremity of love.</A><br>
<A>I saw her hand: she has a leathern hand.</A><br>
<A>A freestone-colour'd hand; I verily did think</A><br>
<A>That her old gloves were on, but 'twas her hands:</A><br>
<A>She has a huswife's hand; but that's no matter:</A><br>
<A>I say she never did invent this letter;</A><br>
<A>This is a man's invention and his hand.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Sure, it is hers.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Why, 'tis a boisterous and a cruel style.</A><br>
<A>A style for-challengers; why, she defies me,</A><br>
<A>Like Turk to Christian: women's gentle brain</A><br>
<A>Could not drop forth such giant-rude invention</A><br>
<A>Such Ethiope words, blacker in their effect</A><br>
<A>Than in their countenance. Will you hear the letter?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</td>
<blockquote>
<A>So please you, for I never heard it yet;</A><br>
<A>Yet heard too much of Phebe's cruelty.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>She Phebes me: mark how the tyrant writes.</A><br>
<p><i>Reads</i></p>
<A>Art thou god to shepherd turn'd,</A><br>
<A>That a maiden's heart hath burn'd?</A><br>
<A>Can a woman rail thus?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Call you this railing?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>[Reads]</A><br>
<A>Why, thy godhead laid apart,</A><br>
<A>Warr'st thou with a woman's heart?</A><br>
<A>Did you ever hear such railing?</A><br>
<A>Whiles the eye of man did woo me,</A><br>
<A>That could do no vengeance to me.</A><br>
<A>Meaning me a beast.</A><br>
<A>If the scorn of your bright eyne</A><br>
<A>Have power to raise such love in mine,</A><br>
<A>Alack, in me what strange effect</A><br>
<A>Would they work in mild aspect!</A><br>
<A>Whiles you chid me, I did love;</A><br>
<A>How then might your prayers move!</A><br>
<A>He that brings this love to thee</A><br>
<A>Little knows this love in me:</A><br>
<A>And by him seal up thy mind;</A><br>
<A>Whether that thy youth and kind</A><br>
<A>Will the faithful offer take</A><br>
<A>Of me and all that I can make;</A><br>
<A>Or else by him my love deny,</A><br>
<A>And then I'll study how to die.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Call you this chiding?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Alas, poor shepherd!</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Do you pity him? no, he deserves no pity. Wilt</A><br>
<A>thou love such a woman? What, to make thee an</A><br>
<A>instrument and play false strains upon thee! not to</A><br>
<A>be endured! Well, go your way to her, for I see</A><br>
<A>love hath made thee a tame snake, and say this to</A><br>
<A>her: that if she love me, I charge her to love</A><br>
<A>thee; if she will not, I will never have her unless</A><br>
<A>thou entreat for her. If you be a true lover,</A><br>
<A>hence, and not a word; for here comes more company.</A><br>
<p><i>Exit SILVIUS</i></p>
<p><i>Enter OLIVER</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Good morrow, fair ones: pray you, if you know,</A><br>
<A>Where in the purlieus of this forest stands</A><br>
<A>A sheep-cote fenced about with olive trees?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>West of this place, down in the neighbour bottom:</A><br>
<A>The rank of osiers by the murmuring stream</A><br>
<A>Left on your right hand brings you to the place.</A><br>
<A>But at this hour the house doth keep itself;</A><br>
<A>There's none within.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
<blockquote>
<A>If that an eye may profit by a tongue,</A><br>
<A>Then should I know you by description;</A><br>
<A>Such garments and such years: 'The boy is fair,</A><br>
<A>Of female favour, and bestows himself</A><br>
<A>Like a ripe sister: the woman low</A><br>
<A>And browner than her brother.' Are not you</A><br>
<A>The owner of the house I did inquire for?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>It is no boast, being ask'd, to say we are.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Orlando doth commend him to you both,</A><br>
<A>And to that youth he calls his Rosalind</A><br>
<A>He sends this bloody napkin. Are you he?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I am: what must we understand by this?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Some of my shame; if you will know of me</A><br>
<A>What man I am, and how, and why, and where</A><br>
<A>This handkercher was stain'd.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I pray you, tell it.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
<blockquote>
<A>When last the young Orlando parted from you</A><br>
<A>He left a promise to return again</A><br>
<A>Within an hour, and pacing through the forest,</A><br>
<A>Chewing the food of sweet and bitter fancy,</A><br>
<A>Lo, what befell! he threw his eye aside,</A><br>
<A>And mark what object did present itself:</A><br>
<A>Under an oak, whose boughs were moss'd with age</A><br>
<A>And high top bald with dry antiquity,</A><br>
<A>A wretched ragged man, o'ergrown with hair,</A><br>
<A>Lay sleeping on his back: about his neck</A><br>
<A>A green and gilded snake had wreathed itself,</A><br>
<A>Who with her head nimble in threats approach'd</A><br>
<A>The opening of his mouth; but suddenly,</A><br>
<A>Seeing Orlando, it unlink'd itself,</A><br>
<A>And with indented glides did slip away</A><br>
<A>Into a bush: under which bush's shade</A><br>
<A>A lioness, with udders all drawn dry,</A><br>
<A>Lay couching, head on ground, with catlike watch,</A><br>
<A>When that the sleeping man should stir; for 'tis</A><br>
<A>The royal disposition of that beast</A><br>
<A>To prey on nothing that doth seem as dead:</A><br>
<A>This seen, Orlando did approach the man</A><br>
<A>And found it was his brother, his elder brother.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>O, I have heard him speak of that same brother;</A><br>
<A>And he did render him the most unnatural</A><br>
<A>That lived amongst men.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
<blockquote>
<A>And well he might so do,</A><br>
<A>For well I know he was unnatural.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>But, to Orlando: did he leave him there,</A><br>
<A>Food to the suck'd and hungry lioness?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Twice did he turn his back and purposed so;</A><br>
<A>But kindness, nobler ever than revenge,</A><br>
<A>And nature, stronger than his just occasion,</A><br>
<A>Made him give battle to the lioness,</A><br>
<A>Who quickly fell before him: in which hurtling</A><br>
<A>From miserable slumber I awaked.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Are you his brother?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Wast you he rescued?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Was't you that did so oft contrive to kill him?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
<blockquote>
<A>'Twas I; but 'tis not I	I do not shame</A><br>
<A>To tell you what I was, since my conversion</A><br>
<A>So sweetly tastes, being the thing I am.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>But, for the bloody napkin?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
<blockquote>
<A>By and by.</A><br>
<A>When from the first to last betwixt us two</A><br>
<A>Tears our recountments had most kindly bathed,</A><br>
<A>As how I came into that desert place:--</A><br>
<A>In brief, he led me to the gentle duke,</A><br>
<A>Who gave me fresh array and entertainment,</A><br>
<A>Committing me unto my brother's love;</A><br>
<A>Who led me instantly unto his cave,</A><br>
<A>There stripp'd himself, and here upon his arm</A><br>
<A>The lioness had torn some flesh away,</A><br>
<A>Which all this while had bled; and now he fainted</A><br>
<A>And cried, in fainting, upon Rosalind.</A><br>
<A>Brief, I recover'd him, bound up his wound;</A><br>
<A>And, after some small space, being strong at heart,</A><br>
<A>He sent me hither, stranger as I am,</A><br>
<A>To tell this story, that you might excuse</A><br>
<A>His broken promise, and to give this napkin</A><br>
<A>Dyed in his blood unto the shepherd youth</A><br>
<A>That he in sport doth call his Rosalind.</A><br>
<p><i>ROSALIND swoons</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Why, how now, Ganymede! sweet Ganymede!</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Many will swoon when they do look on blood.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>There is more in it. Cousin Ganymede!</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Look, he recovers.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I would I were at home.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>We'll lead you thither.</A><br>
<A>I pray you, will you take him by the arm?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Be of good cheer, youth: you a man! you lack a</A><br>
<A>man's heart.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I do so, I confess it. Ah, sirrah, a body would</A><br>
<A>think this was well counterfeited! I pray you, tell</A><br>
<A>your brother how well I counterfeited. Heigh-ho!</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
<blockquote>
<A>This was not counterfeit: there is too great</A><br>
<A>testimony in your complexion that it was a passion</A><br>
<A>of earnest.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Counterfeit, I assure you.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Well then, take a good heart and counterfeit to be a man.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>So I do: but, i' faith, I should have been a woman by right.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Celia</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Come, you look paler and paler: pray you, draw</A><br>
<A>homewards. Good sir, go with us.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
<blockquote>
<A>That will I, for I must bear answer back</A><br>
<A>How you excuse my brother, Rosalind.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I shall devise something: but, I pray you, commend</A><br>
<A>my counterfeiting to him. Will you go?</A><br>
<p><i>Exeunt</i></p>
</blockquote><p>
<H3>ACT V</h3>
<h3>SCENE I. The forest.</h3>
<p><blockquote>
<i>Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY</i>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>We shall find a time, Audrey; patience, gentle Audrey.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audrey</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Faith, the priest was good enough, for all the old</A><br>
<A>gentleman's saying.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>A most wicked Sir Oliver, Audrey, a most vile</A><br>
<A>Martext. But, Audrey, there is a youth here in the</A><br>
<A>forest lays claim to you.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audrey</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Ay, I know who 'tis; he hath no interest in me in</A><br>
<A>the world: here comes the man you mean.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>It is meat and drink to me to see a clown: by my</A><br>
<A>troth, we that have good wits have much to answer</A><br>
<A>for; we shall be flouting; we cannot hold.</A><br>
<p><i>Enter WILLIAM</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">William</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Good even, Audrey.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audrey</td>
<blockquote>
<A>God ye good even, William.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">William</td>
<blockquote>
<A>And good even to you, sir.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Good even, gentle friend. Cover thy head, cover thy</A><br>
<A>head; nay, prithee, be covered. How old are you, friend?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">William</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Five and twenty, sir.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>A ripe age. Is thy name William?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">William</td>
<blockquote>
<A>William, sir.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>A fair name. Wast born i' the forest here?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">William</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Ay, sir, I thank God.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>'Thank God;' a good answer. Art rich?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">William</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Faith, sir, so so.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>'So so' is good, very good, very excellent good; and</A><br>
<A>yet it is not; it is but so so. Art thou wise?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">William</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Ay, sir, I have a pretty wit.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Why, thou sayest well. I do now remember a saying,</A><br>
<A>'The fool doth think he is wise, but the wise man</A><br>
<A>knows himself to be a fool.' The heathen</A><br>
<A>philosopher, when he had a desire to eat a grape,</A><br>
<A>would open his lips when he put it into his mouth;</A><br>
<A>meaning thereby that grapes were made to eat and</A><br>
<A>lips to open. You do love this maid?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">William</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I do, sir.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Give me your hand. Art thou learned?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">William</td>
<blockquote>
<A>No, sir.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Then learn this of me: to have, is to have; for it</A><br>
<A>is a figure in rhetoric that drink, being poured out</A><br>
<A>of a cup into a glass, by filling the one doth empty</A><br>
<A>the other; for all your writers do consent that ipse</A><br>
<A>is he: now, you are not ipse, for I am he.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">William</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Which he, sir?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>He, sir, that must marry this woman. Therefore, you</A><br>
<A>clown, abandon,--which is in the vulgar leave,--the</A><br>
<A>society,--which in the boorish is company,--of this</A><br>
<A>female,--which in the common is woman; which</A><br>
<A>together is, abandon the society of this female, or,</A><br>
<A>clown, thou perishest; or, to thy better</A><br>
<A>understanding, diest; or, to wit I kill thee, make</A><br>
<A>thee away, translate thy life into death, thy</A><br>
<A>liberty into bondage: I will deal in poison with</A><br>
<A>thee, or in bastinado, or in steel; I will bandy</A><br>
<A>with thee in faction; I will o'errun thee with</A><br>
<A>policy; I will kill thee a hundred and fifty ways:</A><br>
<A>therefore tremble and depart.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audrey</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Do, good William.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">William</td>
<blockquote>
<A>God rest you merry, sir.</A><br>
<p><i>Exit</i></p>
<p><i>Enter CORIN</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corin</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Our master and mistress seeks you; come, away, away!</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Trip, Audrey! trip, Audrey! I attend, I attend.</A><br>
<p><i>Exeunt</i></p>
</blockquote>
<h3>SCENE II. The forest.</h3>
<p><blockquote>
<i>Enter ORLANDO and OLIVER</i>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Is't possible that on so little acquaintance you</A><br>
<A>should like her? that but seeing you should love</A><br>
<A>her? and loving woo? and, wooing, she should</A><br>
<A>grant? and will you persever to enjoy her?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Neither call the giddiness of it in question, the</A><br>
<A>poverty of her, the small acquaintance, my sudden</A><br>
<A>wooing, nor her sudden consenting; but say with me,</A><br>
<A>I love Aliena; say with her that she loves me;</A><br>
<A>consent with both that we may enjoy each other: it</A><br>
<A>shall be to your good; for my father's house and all</A><br>
<A>the revenue that was old Sir Rowland's will I</A><br>
<A>estate upon you, and here live and die a shepherd.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>You have my consent. Let your wedding be to-morrow:</A><br>
<A>thither will I invite the duke and all's contented</A><br>
<A>followers. Go you and prepare Aliena; for look</A><br>
<A>you, here comes my Rosalind.</A><br>
<p><i>Enter ROSALIND</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>God save you, brother.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oliver</td>
<blockquote>
<A>And you, fair sister.</A><br>
<p><i>Exit</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>O, my dear Orlando, how it grieves me to see thee</A><br>
<A>wear thy heart in a scarf!</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>It is my arm.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I thought thy heart had been wounded with the claws</A><br>
<A>of a lion.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Wounded it is, but with the eyes of a lady.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Did your brother tell you how I counterfeited to</A><br>
<A>swoon when he showed me your handkerchief?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Ay, and greater wonders than that.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>O, I know where you are: nay, 'tis true: there was</A><br>
<A>never any thing so sudden but the fight of two rams</A><br>
<A>and Caesar's thrasonical brag of 'I came, saw, and</A><br>
<A>overcame:' for your brother and my sister no sooner</A><br>
<A>met but they looked, no sooner looked but they</A><br>
<A>loved, no sooner loved but they sighed, no sooner</A><br>
<A>sighed but they asked one another the reason, no</A><br>
<A>sooner knew the reason but they sought the remedy;</A><br>
<A>and in these degrees have they made a pair of stairs</A><br>
<A>to marriage which they will climb incontinent, or</A><br>
<A>else be incontinent before marriage: they are in</A><br>
<A>the very wrath of love and they will together; clubs</A><br>
<A>cannot part them.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>They shall be married to-morrow, and I will bid the</A><br>
<A>duke to the nuptial. But, O, how bitter a thing it</A><br>
<A>is to look into happiness through another man's</A><br>
<A>eyes! By so much the more shall I to-morrow be at</A><br>
<A>the height of heart-heaviness, by how much I shall</A><br>
<A>think my brother happy in having what he wishes for.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Why then, to-morrow I cannot serve your turn for Rosalind?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I can live no longer by thinking.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I will weary you then no longer with idle talking.</A><br>
<A>Know of me then, for now I speak to some purpose,</A><br>
<A>that I know you are a gentleman of good conceit: I</A><br>
<A>speak not this that you should bear a good opinion</A><br>
<A>of my knowledge, insomuch I say I know you are;</A><br>
<A>neither do I labour for a greater esteem than may in</A><br>
<A>some little measure draw a belief from you, to do</A><br>
<A>yourself good and not to grace me. Believe then, if</A><br>
<A>you please, that I can do strange things: I have,</A><br>
<A>since I was three year old, conversed with a</A><br>
<A>magician, most profound in his art and yet not</A><br>
<A>damnable. If you do love Rosalind so near the heart</A><br>
<A>as your gesture cries it out, when your brother</A><br>
<A>marries Aliena, shall you marry her: I know into</A><br>
<A>what straits of fortune she is driven; and it is</A><br>
<A>not impossible to me, if it appear not inconvenient</A><br>
<A>to you, to set her before your eyes tomorrow human</A><br>
<A>as she is and without any danger.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Speakest thou in sober meanings?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>By my life, I do; which I tender dearly, though I</A><br>
<A>say I am a magician. Therefore, put you in your</A><br>
<A>best array: bid your friends; for if you will be</A><br>
<A>married to-morrow, you shall, and to Rosalind, if you will.</A><br>
<p><i>Enter SILVIUS and PHEBE</i></p>
<A>Look, here comes a lover of mine and a lover of hers.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phebe</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Youth, you have done me much ungentleness,</A><br>
<A>To show the letter that I writ to you.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I care not if I have: it is my study</A><br>
<A>To seem despiteful and ungentle to you:</A><br>
<A>You are there followed by a faithful shepherd;</A><br>
<A>Look upon him, love him; he worships you.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phebe</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Good shepherd, tell this youth what 'tis to love.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</td>
<blockquote>
<A>It is to be all made of sighs and tears;</A><br>
<A>And so am I for Phebe.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phebe</td>
<blockquote>
<A>And I for Ganymede.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>And I for Rosalind.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>And I for no woman.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</td>
<blockquote>
<A>It is to be all made of faith and service;</A><br>
<A>And so am I for Phebe.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phebe</td>
<blockquote>
<A>And I for Ganymede.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>And I for Rosalind.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>And I for no woman.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</td>
<blockquote>
<A>It is to be all made of fantasy,</A><br>
<A>All made of passion and all made of wishes,</A><br>
<A>All adoration, duty, and observance,</A><br>
<A>All humbleness, all patience and impatience,</A><br>
<A>All purity, all trial, all observance;</A><br>
<A>And so am I for Phebe.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phebe</td>
<blockquote>
<A>And so am I for Ganymede.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>And so am I for Rosalind.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>And so am I for no woman.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phebe</td>
<blockquote>
<A>If this be so, why blame you me to love you?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</td>
<blockquote>
<A>If this be so, why blame you me to love you?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>If this be so, why blame you me to love you?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Who do you speak to, 'Why blame you me to love you?'</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>To her that is not here, nor doth not hear.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Pray you, no more of this; 'tis like the howling</A><br>
<A>of Irish wolves against the moon.</A><br>
<p><i>To SILVIUS</i></p>
<A>I will help you, if I can:</A><br>
<p><i>To PHEBE</i></p>
<A>I would love you, if I could. To-morrow meet me all together.</A><br>
<p><i>To PHEBE</i></p>
<A>I will marry you, if ever I marry woman, and I'll be</A><br>
<A>married to-morrow:</A><br>
<p><i>To ORLANDO</i></p>
<A>I will satisfy you, if ever I satisfied man, and you</A><br>
<A>shall be married to-morrow:</A><br>
<p><i>To SILVIUS</i></p>
<A>I will content you, if what pleases you contents</A><br>
<A>you, and you shall be married to-morrow.</A><br>
<p><i>To ORLANDO</i></p>
<A>As you love Rosalind, meet:</A><br>
<p><i>To SILVIUS</i></p>
<A>as you love Phebe, meet: and as I love no woman,</A><br>
<A>I'll meet. So fare you well: I have left you commands.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I'll not fail, if I live.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phebe</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Nor I.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Nor I.</A><br>
<p><i>Exeunt</i></p>
</blockquote>
<h3>SCENE III. The forest.</h3>
<p><blockquote>
<i>Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY</i>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>To-morrow is the joyful day, Audrey; to-morrow will</A><br>
<A>we be married.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audrey</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I do desire it with all my heart; and I hope it is</A><br>
<A>no dishonest desire to desire to be a woman of the</A><br>
<A>world. Here comes two of the banished duke's pages.</A><br>
<p><i>Enter two Pages</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Page</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Well met, honest gentleman.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>By my troth, well met. Come, sit, sit, and a song.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Page</td>
<blockquote>
<A>We are for you: sit i' the middle.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Page</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Shall we clap into't roundly, without hawking or</A><br>
<A>spitting or saying we are hoarse, which are the only</A><br>
<A>prologues to a bad voice?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Page</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I'faith, i'faith; and both in a tune, like two</A><br>
<A>gipsies on a horse.</A><br>
<A>SONG.</A><br>
<A>It was a lover and his lass,</A><br>
<A>With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,</A><br>
<A>That o'er the green corn-field did pass</A><br>
<A>In the spring time, the only pretty ring time,</A><br>
<A>When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding:</A><br>
<A>Sweet lovers love the spring.</A><br>
<A>Between the acres of the rye,</A><br>
<A>With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino</A><br>
<A>These pretty country folks would lie,</A><br>
<A>In spring time,  & c.</A><br>
<A>This carol they began that hour,</A><br>
<A>With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,</A><br>
<A>How that a life was but a flower</A><br>
<A>In spring time,  & c.</A><br>
<A>And therefore take the present time,</A><br>
<A>With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino;</A><br>
<A>For love is crowned with the prime</A><br>
<A>In spring time,  & c.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Truly, young gentlemen, though there was no great</A><br>
<A>matter in the ditty, yet the note was very</A><br>
<A>untuneable.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Page</td>
<blockquote>
<A>You are deceived, sir: we kept time, we lost not our time.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>By my troth, yes; I count it but time lost to hear</A><br>
<A>such a foolish song. God be wi' you; and God mend</A><br>
<A>your voices! Come, Audrey.</A><br>
<p><i>Exeunt</i></p>
</blockquote>
<h3>SCENE IV. The forest.</h3>
<p><blockquote>
<i>Enter DUKE SENIOR, AMIENS, JAQUES, ORLANDO, OLIVER, and CELIA</i>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Dost thou believe, Orlando, that the boy</A><br>
<A>Can do all this that he hath promised?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I sometimes do believe, and sometimes do not;</A><br>
<A>As those that fear they hope, and know they fear.</A><br>
<p><i>Enter ROSALIND, SILVIUS, and PHEBE</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Patience once more, whiles our compact is urged:</A><br>
<A>You say, if I bring in your Rosalind,</A><br>
<A>You will bestow her on Orlando here?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
<blockquote>
<A>That would I, had I kingdoms to give with her.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>And you say, you will have her, when I bring her?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>That would I, were I of all kingdoms king.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>You say, you'll marry me, if I be willing?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phebe</td>
<blockquote>
<A>That will I, should I die the hour after.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>But if you do refuse to marry me,</A><br>
<A>You'll give yourself to this most faithful shepherd?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phebe</td>
<blockquote>
<A>So is the bargain.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>You say, that you'll have Phebe, if she will?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Silvius</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Though to have her and death were both one thing.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I have promised to make all this matter even.</A><br>
<A>Keep you your word, O duke, to give your daughter;</A><br>
<A>You yours, Orlando, to receive his daughter:</A><br>
<A>Keep your word, Phebe, that you'll marry me,</A><br>
<A>Or else refusing me, to wed this shepherd:</A><br>
<A>Keep your word, Silvius, that you'll marry her.</A><br>
<A>If she refuse me: and from hence I go,</A><br>
<A>To make these doubts all even.</A><br>
<p><i>Exeunt ROSALIND and CELIA</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I do remember in this shepherd boy</A><br>
<A>Some lively touches of my daughter's favour.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>My lord, the first time that I ever saw him</A><br>
<A>Methought he was a brother to your daughter:</A><br>
<A>But, my good lord, this boy is forest-born,</A><br>
<A>And hath been tutor'd in the rudiments</A><br>
<A>Of many desperate studies by his uncle,</A><br>
<A>Whom he reports to be a great magician,</A><br>
<A>Obscured in the circle of this forest.</A><br>
<p><i>Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>There is, sure, another flood toward, and these</A><br>
<A>couples are coming to the ark. Here comes a pair of</A><br>
<A>very strange beasts, which in all tongues are called fools.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Salutation and greeting to you all!</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Good my lord, bid him welcome: this is the</A><br>
<A>motley-minded gentleman that I have so often met in</A><br>
<A>the forest: he hath been a courtier, he swears.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>If any man doubt that, let him put me to my</A><br>
<A>purgation. I have trod a measure; I have flattered</A><br>
<A>a lady; I have been politic with my friend, smooth</A><br>
<A>with mine enemy; I have undone three tailors; I have</A><br>
<A>had four quarrels, and like to have fought one.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>And how was that ta'en up?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Faith, we met, and found the quarrel was upon the</A><br>
<A>seventh cause.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>How seventh cause? Good my lord, like this fellow.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I like him very well.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>God 'ild you, sir; I desire you of the like. I</A><br>
<A>press in here, sir, amongst the rest of the country</A><br>
<A>copulatives, to swear and to forswear: according as</A><br>
<A>marriage binds and blood breaks: a poor virgin,</A><br>
<A>sir, an ill-favoured thing, sir, but mine own; a poor</A><br>
<A>humour of mine, sir, to take that that no man else</A><br>
<A>will: rich honesty dwells like a miser, sir, in a</A><br>
<A>poor house; as your pearl in your foul oyster.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
<blockquote>
<A>By my faith, he is very swift and sententious.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>According to the fool's bolt, sir, and such dulcet diseases.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>But, for the seventh cause; how did you find the</A><br>
<A>quarrel on the seventh cause?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Upon a lie seven times removed:--bear your body more</A><br>
<A>seeming, Audrey:--as thus, sir. I did dislike the</A><br>
<A>cut of a certain courtier's beard: he sent me word,</A><br>
<A>if I said his beard was not cut well, he was in the</A><br>
<A>mind it was: this is called the Retort Courteous.</A><br>
<A>If I sent him word again 'it was not well cut,' he</A><br>
<A>would send me word, he cut it to please himself:</A><br>
<A>this is called the Quip Modest. If again 'it was</A><br>
<A>not well cut,' he disabled my judgment: this is</A><br>
<A>called the Reply Churlish. If again 'it was not</A><br>
<A>well cut,' he would answer, I spake not true: this</A><br>
<A>is called the Reproof Valiant. If again 'it was not</A><br>
<A>well cut,' he would say I lied: this is called the</A><br>
<A>Counter-cheque Quarrelsome: and so to the Lie</A><br>
<A>Circumstantial and the Lie Direct.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>And how oft did you say his beard was not well cut?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I durst go no further than the Lie Circumstantial,</A><br>
<A>nor he durst not give me the Lie Direct; and so we</A><br>
<A>measured swords and parted.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Can you nominate in order now the degrees of the lie?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Touchstone</td>
<blockquote>
<A>O sir, we quarrel in print, by the book; as you have</A><br>
<A>books for good manners: I will name you the degrees.</A><br>
<A>The first, the Retort Courteous; the second, the</A><br>
<A>Quip Modest; the third, the Reply Churlish; the</A><br>
<A>fourth, the Reproof Valiant; the fifth, the</A><br>
<A>Countercheque Quarrelsome; the sixth, the Lie with</A><br>
<A>Circumstance; the seventh, the Lie Direct. All</A><br>
<A>these you may avoid but the Lie Direct; and you may</A><br>
<A>avoid that too, with an If. I knew when seven</A><br>
<A>justices could not take up a quarrel, but when the</A><br>
<A>parties were met themselves, one of them thought but</A><br>
<A>of an If, as, 'If you said so, then I said so;' and</A><br>
<A>they shook hands and swore brothers. Your If is the</A><br>
<A>only peacemaker; much virtue in If.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Is not this a rare fellow, my lord? he's as good at</A><br>
<A>any thing and yet a fool.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
<blockquote>
<A>He uses his folly like a stalking-horse and under</A><br>
<A>the presentation of that he shoots his wit.</A><br>
<p><i>Enter HYMEN, ROSALIND, and CELIA</i></p>
<p><i>Still Music</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hymen</td>
<blockquote>
<A>        Then is there mirth in heaven,</A><br>
<A>When earthly things made even</A><br>
<A>Atone together.</A><br>
<A>Good duke, receive thy daughter</A><br>
<A>Hymen from heaven brought her,</A><br>
<A>Yea, brought her hither,</A><br>
<A>That thou mightst join her hand with his</A><br>
<A>Whose heart within his bosom is.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>[To DUKE SENIOR]  To you I give myself, for I am yours.</A><br>
<p><i>To ORLANDO</i></p>
<A>To you I give myself, for I am yours.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
<blockquote>
<A>If there be truth in sight, you are my daughter.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orlando</td>
<blockquote>
<A>If there be truth in sight, you are my Rosalind.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phebe</td>
<blockquote>
<A>If sight and shape be true,</A><br>
<A>Why then, my love adieu!</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I'll have no father, if you be not he:</A><br>
<A>I'll have no husband, if you be not he:</A><br>
<A>Nor ne'er wed woman, if you be not she.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hymen</td>
<blockquote>
<A>        Peace, ho! I bar confusion:</A><br>
<A>'Tis I must make conclusion</A><br>
<A>Of these most strange events:</A><br>
<A>Here's eight that must take hands</A><br>
<A>To join in Hymen's bands,</A><br>
<A>If truth holds true contents.</A><br>
<A>You and you no cross shall part:</A><br>
<A>You and you are heart in heart</A><br>
<A>You to his love must accord,</A><br>
<A>Or have a woman to your lord:</A><br>
<A>You and you are sure together,</A><br>
<A>As the winter to foul weather.</A><br>
<A>Whiles a wedlock-hymn we sing,</A><br>
<A>Feed yourselves with questioning;</A><br>
<A>That reason wonder may diminish,</A><br>
<A>How thus we met, and these things finish.</A><br>
<A>SONG.</A><br>
<A>Wedding is great Juno's crown:</A><br>
<A>O blessed bond of board and bed!</A><br>
<A>'Tis Hymen peoples every town;</A><br>
<A>High wedlock then be honoured:</A><br>
<A>Honour, high honour and renown,</A><br>
<A>To Hymen, god of every town!</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
<blockquote>
<A>O my dear niece, welcome thou art to me!</A><br>
<A>Even daughter, welcome, in no less degree.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phebe</td>
<blockquote>
<A>I will not eat my word, now thou art mine;</A><br>
<A>Thy faith my fancy to thee doth combine.</A><br>
<p><i>Enter JAQUES DE BOYS</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques De boys</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Let me have audience for a word or two:</A><br>
<A>I am the second son of old Sir Rowland,</A><br>
<A>That bring these tidings to this fair assembly.</A><br>
<A>Duke Frederick, hearing how that every day</A><br>
<A>Men of great worth resorted to this forest,</A><br>
<A>Address'd a mighty power; which were on foot,</A><br>
<A>In his own conduct, purposely to take</A><br>
<A>His brother here and put him to the sword:</A><br>
<A>And to the skirts of this wild wood he came;</A><br>
<A>Where meeting with an old religious man,</A><br>
<A>After some question with him, was converted</A><br>
<A>Both from his enterprise and from the world,</A><br>
<A>His crown bequeathing to his banish'd brother,</A><br>
<A>And all their lands restored to them again</A><br>
<A>That were with him exiled. This to be true,</A><br>
<A>I do engage my life.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Welcome, young man;</A><br>
<A>Thou offer'st fairly to thy brothers' wedding:</A><br>
<A>To one his lands withheld, and to the other</A><br>
<A>A land itself at large, a potent dukedom.</A><br>
<A>First, in this forest, let us do those ends</A><br>
<A>That here were well begun and well begot:</A><br>
<A>And after, every of this happy number</A><br>
<A>That have endured shrewd days and nights with us</A><br>
<A>Shall share the good of our returned fortune,</A><br>
<A>According to the measure of their states.</A><br>
<A>Meantime, forget this new-fall'n dignity</A><br>
<A>And fall into our rustic revelry.</A><br>
<A>Play, music! And you, brides and bridegrooms all,</A><br>
<A>With measure heap'd in joy, to the measures fall.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Sir, by your patience. If I heard you rightly,</A><br>
<A>The duke hath put on a religious life</A><br>
<A>And thrown into neglect the pompous court?</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques De boys</td>
<blockquote>
<A>He hath.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>To him will I : out of these convertites</A><br>
<A>There is much matter to be heard and learn'd.</A><br>
<p><i>To DUKE SENIOR</i></p>
<A>You to your former honour I bequeath;</A><br>
<A>Your patience and your virtue well deserves it:</A><br>
<p><i>To ORLANDO</i></p>
<A>You to a love that your true faith doth merit:</A><br>
<p><i>To OLIVER</i></p>
<A>You to your land and love and great allies:</A><br>
<p><i>To SILVIUS</i></p>
<A>You to a long and well-deserved bed:</A><br>
<p><i>To TOUCHSTONE</i></p>
<A>And you to wrangling; for thy loving voyage</A><br>
<A>Is but for two months victuall'd. So, to your pleasures:</A><br>
<A>I am for other than for dancing measures.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Stay, Jaques, stay.</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jaques</td>
<blockquote>
<A>To see no pastime I	what you would have</A><br>
<A>I'll stay to know at your abandon'd cave.</A><br>
<p><i>Exit</i></p>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Senior</td>
<blockquote>
<A>Proceed, proceed: we will begin these rites,</A><br>
<A>As we do trust they'll end, in true delights.</A><br>
<p><i>A dance</i></p>
<A>EPILOGUE</A><br>
</blockquote>

<tr><td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
<blockquote>
<A>It is not the fashion to see the lady the epilogue;</A><br>
<A>but it is no more unhandsome than to see the lord</A><br>
<A>the prologue. If it be true that good wine needs</A><br>
<A>no bush, 'tis true that a good play needs no</A><br>
<A>epilogue; yet to good wine they do use good bushes,</A><br>
<A>and good plays prove the better by the help of good</A><br>
<A>epilogues. What a case am I in then, that am</A><br>
<A>neither a good epilogue nor cannot insinuate with</A><br>
<A>you in the behalf of a good play! I am not</A><br>
<A>furnished like a beggar, therefore to beg will not</A><br>
<A>become me: my way is to conjure you; and I'll begin</A><br>
<A>with the women. I charge you, O women, for the love</A><br>
<A>you bear to men, to like as much of this play as</A><br>
<A>please you: and I charge you, O men, for the love</A><br>
<A>you bear to women--as I perceive by your simpering,</A><br>
<A>none of you hates them--that between you and the</A><br>
<A>women the play may please. If I were a woman I</A><br>
<A>would kiss as many of you as had beards that pleased</A><br>
<A>me, complexions that liked me and breaths that I</A><br>
<A>defied not: and, I am sure, as many as have good</A><br>
<A>beards or good faces or sweet breaths will, for my</A><br>
<A>kind offer, when I make curtsy, bid me farewell.</A><br>
<p><i>Exeunt</i></p>
















					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>